Exe $
Co — ——
oe
FZ:

DUNGEON MASTER'S GUIDE

CREDITS
Lead Designers: Christopher Perkins, James Wyatt
Brian Valeza, Cyril Van Der Haegen, Randy Vargas, Richard
2
Designers: Jeremy Crawford, F. Wesley Schneider, Ray Winninger
hitters, Zuzanna Wuzyk, Kieran Yanner
Rules Developers: Jeremy Crawford (lead), Makenzie De Armas, Cartographers: Francesca Bzerald, Dyson Logos, Mike Schley
Ben Petrisor
Concept Art Director: Josh Herman
Editors: Adrian Ng (lead), Judy Bauer, Janica Carter
Concept Artists: Even Amundsen, Carlo Arellano, Michael
Playtest Analysts: Ron Lundeen (lead), Dan Dillon, Patrick Renie
Broussard, John Grello, Tyler Jacobson, 98 Collective,
Noor Rahman
{Art Directors: Kate Irwin (lead), Josh Herman,
Graphic Designers: Trish Yochum (lead), Matt Cole
Consultants: Zac Clay, Jennifer Kretchmer, James Mendez, Matthew
Cover illustrators: Tyler Jacobson, Simen Meyer, Olena Richards
Mercer, Jonathan Tomhave, Alyssa Visscher, Deborah Ann Woll
Interior tlustrators: Helder Almeida, Joy Ang, David Astruga, Alfven ‘Additional Consultation: justice Ramin Arman, Kyle Brink, Amanda
‘Ato, Tom Babbey, Helge
C. Balzer, Luca Bancone, Mark Behm,
Hamon, Jay Jani, Car Sibley, Emi Tanji, Jason Tondro
Eric Belisle, Olivier Bernard, Zoltan Boros, Bruce Brenneise,
Aleksi Briclo, Ekaterina Burmak, Filip Burburan, Paul Scott
Producers: Oan Tovar (lead), Bll Benham, Siera Bruggeman,
Canavan, Dawn Carlos, Clint Cearley, Diana Cearley, Sidharth
Robert Hawkey
Chaturvedi, David René Christensen, Conceptopolis, Hart
Print Operations Engineers: Basil Hale, Scott West
Conway, CoupleOfKooks, Daarken, Kent Davis, Nikki Dawes, Axel
Imaging Technicians: Daniel Corona, Meagan Kenreck, Kevin Yee
Defois, Alex Diaz, Simon Dominic, Olga Orebas, Wayne England,
Prepress Specialist: jefferson Dunlap
‘Aurore Folny, Jessica Fong, Vallez Gax, Justyna Gil, lise Gort,
Alexandre Honoré, Ralph Horsley, Jason juta, Sam Keiser, Julian
Based on the Dungeon Master's Guide (2014) by
Kok, Katerina Ladon, Abigail Larson, Olly Lawson, Linda Lithen, Jererny Crawford (co-lead), Christopher Perkins (co-le
Titus Lunter, Andrew Mar, Raluca Marinescu, Viko Menezes, ad), james
‘Wyatt (co-lead), Peter Lee, Mike Mearls, Robert.
Brynn Metheney, Robson Michel, Calder Moore, Martin Mottet, Schwalb,
Rodney Thompson
Jodie Muir, Scott Murphy, David Auden Nash, Irina Nordsol,
Building on the original game created by
William O'Connor, Robin Olausson, Claudio Pozas, Livia Prima,
Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson and then developed by many
April Prime, Noor Rahman, Chris Rallis, Chris Seaman, Andrea
‘others over the past 50 years
Sipl, Craig J Spearing, Chase Stone, joel Thomas, Beth Trott,

(ON THE Cover ON THE ALT-Cover
‘Tyler Jacobson illustrates the archullain Venger, his evil cohorts Lolth, the Demon Queen of Spiders, spins a tangled web of
‘Skylla and Warduke, and a legion ofskeletal minions. schemes and snares in this illustration by Olena Richards.

6200392100001 EN
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6984.5 C UK
First Printing: November 2024
cA
987654321

‘DUNGE
& DRAGONS
ONS , 08D, Wizard fhe Coat the dragon ampersind, Ox Sun, Dragonla
nce, Eberon For ten Resins. Greyhawk Planescape, Raven Spelamner,
Player Hondo. Monster Manso, Dungeon Masters
Guide, Magic The Gthving alter Wand
ah s
Const pot st nam theies
fespective logs, and The World's rene
Role
Came
pl are ay
adema
ins of g Wiars
ofthe Const inthe USA and ater coi Alcharac andters
the dstctive tenses are property of Wizards ofthe Coss, Tis me
tev protected unhe
decopyri
r ght laws ofthe Unitee es of America Any eprodction er unauthorized use ofthe materi
or artwork contained hetlns prohtited witour the
express witen permission of War
ofthe
ds Coast.

Printed nthe USA. ©2028 Wars of the Coat LUC, POBox 707, Renton, WA 98087-0707, USA. Manufactured by:
Hasbro SA, Rue Emile Bogchat 31, 200 Delmont. CH,
Represented by
aroUK Lt, PO Box NewpoNPIB
rt, YH, UK
Jewen anpas. CONTENU: 1 lire, cart. Importé
au Canada par W2ards of the Cost
LUC, PO Bon 707, Rent
WA 98057-07
on 07, ,
USA. FABRIQ
AUX ETATS-U
UE NIS

CONTENTS
Chapter 1: The Basics. Gods and Other Powers. Chapter 7: Treasure..
What Does a DM Do?... Hazards... ‘Treasure Themes.
‘Things You Need.

Every DM Is Unique.
Ensuring Fun for All, Magic Items.
‘Mutual Respect. Magic Item Categories...
Respect for the Players. ‘Supernatural Gifts, Magic Item Rarity
Respect for the DM. ‘Traps. Awarding Magic Item:
Chapter 2: Running the Game. Activating a Magic Item,
Chapter
4; Creating Adventures.
Know Your Players.. Step-by-Step Adventures. “The Next Daw:
Group Size. Cursed Items.
Lay Out the Premise.
Multiple DMs... Adventure Premise... Magic Item Resilience
Narration... Crafting Magic Items.
Adventure Conflict.
Resolving Outcomes Adventure Situations by Level Magic Item Special Features.
Ability Checks. Adventure Setting. Artifacts
Attack Rolls Draw In the Players... Sentient Magic Items..
Saving Throws... ‘Magic Items A-Z
‘Adventure Patrons
Difficulty Class. Supernatural Hooks... Random Magic Items.
Advantage and Disadvantage Happenstance Hooks. Chapter 8: Bastion:
Consequences. Plan Encounters...
Improvising Damage... Character Objectives.
Improvising Answers Keeping the Adventure Moving... Bastion Map
Running Social Interaction venom Something for Everyone.
Roleplaying Multiple Ways to Progres: Special Facilities.
Attituds Social Interaction Encounters. Orders
Running Explorat Exploration Encounters. Bastion Events,
Using a Map. Fall of a Bastion ..

Appendix A: Lore Glossary...
Actions Encounter Pace and Tension evn 118
Perception. Bring It to an End... Appendix B: Maps..

Travel. Denouement. Barrow Crypt.
Running Combat.. Adventure Rewards.. Caravan Encampment...
Rolling Initiative Adventure Examples. Crossroads Village..
‘Tracking Init Dragon's Lai
Chapter 5: Creating Campaigns
‘Tracking Monsters’ Hit Points... Dungeon Hideout.
Step-by-Step Campaigns..
Using and Tracking Condition: Farmstead.
Your Campaign Journal,
Miniatures.. Keep
‘Campaign Premise...
Tracking Position at Long Range Manor
Narrationin Combat... Mini
Keeping Combat Moving. Road:
Adjusting Ship.
Fight or Flight. Spooky House...
Character Advancement... Underdark Warren..
Volcanic Caves...
Chapter 3: DM's TooIbOX wnennsnnns5O Episodes and Serials..
Getting Players Investe
Time in the Campaign.
Ending a Campaign.
Creating a Creature.. ‘Tracking Sheets
Greyhawk,
Creating a Magic Item. Game Expectations...
Important Names.
Creating a Spell ‘Travel Planner.
Greyhawk’s Premise...
NPC Tracker un
Free City of Greyhawh
Greyhawk Gazetteer. Settlement Tracker.
Campaign Journal
Chapter 6: Cosmology.
DM's Character Tracker.
The Plane
Environmental Effects Campaign Conflicts,
Fear and Mental Stress... Planar Travel
Magic Item Tracker...
Firearms and Explosives.. Planar Adventuri Bastion Tracker...

CHAPTER 1

THE BASICS
D UNGEONS & DRAGONS IS A GAME IN WHICH Be Fair and Flexible. Treat your players in a fair,
you and your friends take on roles and tell impartial manner. The rules help you do this, but
a shared story. While the Player's Handbook when you need to act as referee, try to make deci-
teaches you how to play the game and how to cre- sions that ensure everyone is having fun.
ate characters who are the heroes of the story, the ‘Communicate with Your Players. Open commu-
Dungeon Master's Guide is written for the player who nication is essential to a successful D&D game.
presides over the game and makes sure everyone is Many problems can be solved or even prevented
having fun. This player is the Dungeon Master, or with honest conversation. Ask questions and so-
DM. Being a Dungeon Master is a fun, empowering, licit feedback after or between sessions.
and rewarding experience, and this chapter walks It’s OK to Make Mistakes. If you overlook or mis-
you through the basics. represent something, correct yourself
and move
on. No one expects you to memorize every rule or
Wuat Dogs a DM Do? detail. Even if you don't realize your mistake until
after a game session is over, it's OK to acknowl
The DM gets to play many fun roles:
edge the mistake at the start of the next session
Actor. The DM plays the monsters, choosing their and make adjustments moving forward.
actions and rolling dice for their attacks. The DM « ~

also plays all the people the characters meet. War's New IN THE 2024 VERSION?
Director. Like the director ofamovie, the DM de-
This is the 2024 version ofthe fifth edition Dun-
cides (and describes) what the players’ characters
geon Master's Guide, Much ofthe book has been
encounter in the course of an adventure. The DM reorganized, expanded, and rewritten from the
is also responsible for the pace of a play session
2014 version, and the versions ofthings in this.
and for creating situations that facilitate fun.
book replace versions from older books. Here are
Improviser. A big part of being the DM is deciding
a few highlights:
how to apply the rules as you go and imagining
the consequences of the characters’ actions in a ‘Sound Advice. Every chapter (but especially chap-
way that will make the game fun for everyone. ters 1, 2, 4, and 5) has new advice for Dungeon
Referee. When it’s not clear what ought to happen Masters of all experience levels.
next, the DM decides how to apply the rules. Tracking Sheets. Helpful sheets throughout the

Storyteller. The DM crafts adventures, setting situ- book give you tools to plan your game and keep.
ations in front of the characters that entice them track of your campaign. These sheets are also
to explore and interact with the game world. available on DnDBeyond.com.
Teacher. It’s often the DM's job to teach new players Encounter-Building Assistance. The rules for esti-
how to play the game. mating the difficulty of combat encounters have
Worldbuilder. The DM creates the world where the changed, as you'll see in chapter 4.
game's adventures take place. Even if you're using Ready-Made Elements. Sample adventures in
a published setting, you get to make it yours. chapter 4, a campaign setting in chapter 5, and
new maps in appendix B make it easier to run a
DM Tips game right away.
Expanded and Revised Magic Items. Chapter 7 is
‘The most important part of being a good DM is
packed with new magic items and old ones that
facilitating the fun of everyone at the table. Keep
have been revised.
these tips in mind to help things go smoothly.
Bastions. Chapter 8 has rules that allow player
Embrace the Shared Story. D&D is about telling a characters to build, maintain, and enjoy their
story as a group, so let the other players contrib ‘own strongholds.
ute through the words and deeds of their charac- Lore Glossary. In appendix A, a helpful glossary
ters. Encourage players to engage by asking them explains many ofthe iconic people and loca-
what their characters are doing. tions found throughout the D&D multiverse.
It’s Not a Competition. The DM isn’t competing
against the other players. It’s your job to pro.
fun challenges and keep the story moving,

CHAPTER1|THEBASICS 5

THINGS You NEED needs you or they might have. Some players might
have difficulty
with low light, background music,
What you need to play hasn't changed much since
strong odors, cramped spaces, or specific allergens.
the game's first publication in 1974,
Accommodate what you can; communicate what
you can’t as early as possible.
RULEBOOKS
If possible, play in an area with minimal visual or
As the Dungeon Master, you need this book plus the auditory distractions. Favor surroundings that rein-
Player's Handbook (which contains most of the rules force your desired atmosphere and have little non-
of the game) and the Monster Manual. Your players player traffic. If space is shared, reserve the space in
need access to the Player's Handbook, too, but they advance,
can share as needed. You can also play D&D anywhere you might come
Let players know beforehand what books (other together in an online space, from a group video call
than the Player's Handbook) they can reference toa sophisticated virtual tabletop.
during a playing session. For example, it’s not ap-
propriate for players to look up a monster in the Dice
‘Monster Manual (or the equivalent digital tool) while
You need a full set of polyhedral dice: d4, 46, 48,
fighting that monster. If you're running a published
410, d12, and 420. It's helpful to have at least two of
adventure, players should avoid reading that adven-
each kind, Ideally, each player should also have their
ture so they don't spoil any surprises.
own set of polyhedral dice.
Lots of digital dice rollers exist. Simple, browser-
A DUNGEON MASTER
based dice rollers are easily found on the internet.
One player has the special role of Dungeon Master.
Specialized dice apps can be found in app stores,
Some people love being the DM all the time, while and virtual tabletops typically have dice-rolling
others can end up feeling trapped as the “forever functionality built in.
DM" for their gaming group. The “Group Size” sec-
tion in chapter 2 discusses possibilities for sharing NoTE-TAKING MATERIALS
the role of Dungeon Master among multiple players
Everyone needs some way to take notes. During ev-
in a group.
ery round of combat, someone needs to keep track

PLAYERS: of Initiative, Hit Points, conditions, and other infor-
mation. Players often like to take notes about what
Players who aren't the Dungeon Master take on the happens in the adventure, and at least one of them
roles of the heroes, also known as the characters or should record any clues and treasure the characters
the adventurers.
collect.
D&D plays best with four to six players in addition
to the DM, but it’s possible to run a game with fewer CHARACTER SHEETS
or more adventurers. See the “Group Size" section Players need some way to record important infor-
in chapter 2 for advice on doing so. mation about their characters. Plain paper works
fine, but players might find official or fan-made
FINDING PLAYERS character sheets more helpful in organizing the
‘Where do you find players? Here are a handful of «
suggestions:
ScHEDULING Games
+ Game or hobby stores (the Store Locator on the Sometimes the hardest thing about running a
Wizards of the Coast website can help you find ‘game is finding a time when everyone can play.
stores near you that host D&D events) ‘Some groups play for a few hours every week,
+ Friends, family, community members, and work while others set aside a whole day once a month.
colleagues who enjoy gaming or fantasy Create a schedule that works best for your group.
+ Gaming clubs at schools For new groups, it often helps to schedule a
+ Social media and online messaging sites single-session game (often called a “one-shot”)
+ Gaming conventions as a way for people to try it out. Ifeveryone has a
great time at that one session, it can be easier
to
A PLACE TO PLay get them to make a long-term commitment.
‘The bare minimum ofspace you need to play D&D Scheduling conflicts are sometimes inescap-
is room for everyone in your group to gather and able. The “Group Size” section in chapter 2 offers
participate. some advice on what to do when a player has to
‘When choosing the space you'll be playing in, en- miss a session,
list your players’ help. Think about any accessibility

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

information. A variety of di scenes when playing in person. A vinyl wet-erase
are also available if you're playing online or using mat with a printed grid, a gridded whiteboard, a
digital devices at the table. cutting mat, a large sheet of gridded paper, or a
printed poster map—any of these can serve as a
CAMPAIGN JOURNAL battle grid. The grid should be marked in 1-inch
Throughout this book you'll find tracking sheets squares.
you can use to make your work as a DM easier. You also need plastic or metal miniatures to rep-
They range from sheets you can use to track NPCs resent characters and monsters in the game, but you
or settlements in your game to trackers you can use can use coins, extra dice, paper counters, or even
to make sure you're giving the adventurers a good pieces of candy if miniatures are unavailable.
number of magic items. These tracking sheets can Many software tools designed to facilitate online
form the basis of a campaign journal (see chapter 5), DAD play provide a battle grid. Even without such
and they'll help you plan your adventures and build tools, though, many online D&D games use screen
your world, You can scan or photocopy these sheets sharing in combination with drawing programs,
for your personal use, and you'll find downloadable shared whiteboards, or similar tools as simple battle
versions on DnDBeyond.com. grids. Some DMs are comfortable with software
that allows them to control lighting and show the
UsEFUL ADDITIONS
players exactly what they can see; others find that
Various resources can enrich your game and make complex software gets in the way of the game. Use
it more fun. Many of these resources might have whatever works for you and your group.
digital versions, making computers, tablets, and
smartphones essential elements in some D&D games Carp Accessories
and for some players. Some players and DMs find it helpful to have infor-
mation available in the form of cards. You can buy
DM Screen (or make) cards with individual spells, magi
ADM screen shields your books, notes, and die rolls monster stat blocks, rules reference, and similar in-
from your players. (See the “Ensuring Fun for All” formation for easy reference.
section later in this chapter for more about when
and why you might want to hide die rolls.) Most DM
screens have art on the outward-facing panels and
Wuat 90 You 00 WHEN A O18
handy rules information on the inside-facing panels.
LANDS coeKEo? See THE END OF
Others might be made of fancy wood or sculpted to
help set the mood for your game.
You don't need a physical screen to hide things if
you're playing online, but it can be helpful to have
ready access to important information like condi-
tion definitions, common actions, and other key
rules. Some DMs set up a physical DM screen near
their computer screen. A virtual tabletop might
have reference information like this built in.

ADVENTURES AND SOURCEBOOKS
Beyond the three core rulebooks, a plethora of ad-
ditional content is available from Wizards ofthe
Coast and other publishers. Adventures provide
hooks, plots, maps, and encounters you can use in
your game. Sourcebooks include things like new
character options, new monsters, and inspira~
tion for building your own adventures and
campaigns. You can play D&D without any of
these additional products, but many DMs (and
players) find them to be exciting additions to
the game.

BATTLE Grip AND MINIATURES
Some DMs use a battle grid and miniatures to run
combat encounters, which helps players visualize

CHAPTERI|THE BASICS 7

PREPARING A SESSION
The more you prepare before your game, the mor
e
smoothly
the game will go—to a certai point. To
avoid being either under- or overprepared
, use the
one-hour guideline below and prioritize what to
prepare depending on the time you have
available.

Hour GuIpELINE
A D&D game session usually starts with some
out-
of-game chatter as everyone settles down to play
.
Once the session gets underway, most groups
can
accomplish at least three things during
one hour
of play, where each “thing” might be any of
the
following:

+ Explore a location such as a chamber
in a castle or
acave

+ Converse with an intelligent creature
+ Reach consensus on a divisive issue
+ Solve a tricky riddle or puzzle
+ Survive a deadly trap
+ Fight
a low-difficulty combat encounter

A more difficult combat encounter might coun
t as
two or three things, and a tense negotiation
can use
most or all of an hoof
u pla
r y on its own, MON QUEEN
oF Fu

PREPARATION TIME
‘The following guidelines can help you pre
pare for a
session ofplay using a published adventure,

One-Hour PREPARATION Step 4. Consider how each definite
encounter re-
Ifyou spend one hour each week preparing lates to the players’ motivations (see the “Kn
for your ow
game, follow these steps: Your Players” section in chapter 2). Think abo
ut
elements you can add to interest them. For exa
m-
Step 1. Focus on the story ofthe adventure. Read ple, a combat encounter could open
wit h a tense
or reread the adventure’s introd
uction and back- negotiation designed to appeal
to players who en-
ground information. Create a bulleted list
of key Joy social interaction,
plot points to make sure a coherent story unfolds. Step 5. Skim the encounters you flagged as
pos le.
Step 2. Identify the encounters you want to
run,
then figure out how likely it is each encounter Two-Hour PREPARATION
will
get played, categorizing each one as “def With another hour to prepare, add these step
inite,” s:
“possible,” or “unlikely.”
Step 6. Carefully review each “possible” encounte
Step 3. Gather any maps you'll need r.
for the definite Step 7. Devote any time you have left
and possible encounters, then focus the rema to creating
inder improvisational aids (see the “Improvising
of your prep time on the definite encounters, An-
as swers” section in chapter 2)
outlined below.
For combat encounters, review the Taree-Hour PREPARATION
monsters’
tactics and stat blocks. Note any special rule Ifyou have three hours to prepare, add
s that these steps:
apply to the setting of the encounter.
For social interaction encounters, make not
Step 8. Skim each “unlikely” encounter.
es
about the nonplayer characters (NPCs) in the Step 9. Create a new encounter designed to appe
en- al
specifically to one player, or alter an
counter—their personalities, goals, and tactics. existing en-
counter to relate to the goals and
For exploration encounters, record any clue motivations of
s or
that player's character. Over the course of seve
other information the characters should
learn, ral
sessions, do this for all your players
and review any special rules that might come and their
into
characters.
play in the encounter,

8 CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

How To RuN A SESSION ‘Whether you're running a published adventure or
one of your own creation, your initial description of
This section explains how to run a game session;
room or situation should focus on what the char-
later on, chapters 4 and 5 detail how to combine acters can perceive. You don't have to reveal every
sessions into adventures and adventures into
detail at once. Most players begin to lose focus after
‘campaigns.
about three sentences of descriptive text. As charac-
ters search rooms, open drawers and chests, and ex-
RECAP
amine things more closely, give players more details,
Start each game session after the first with a recap about what their characters find.
of what happened in the previous session. A recap The “Narration” section in chapter 2 offers more
helps players get back into the story. It also provides extensive advice and examples of narration.
important information to players who missed the
previous session. You can provide this recap, or you Srep 2: Ler THE PLAYERS TALK
can invite one or more players to deliver the recap Once you're done describing the situation, ask the
instead, Each approach has benefits: players what their characters want to do, Note what
the players say, and identify how to resolve their ac-
DM Recap. Provide the recap yourself
if you have
tions. Ask them for more information if you need it
specific information you need to impart or if
‘Sometimes the players might give you a group
you want the recap to be concise and focused on
answer: “We go through the door.” Other times,
what's relevant.
individual players might want to do specific things—
Player Recap. Let the players provide the recap if
one might search a chest while another examines
you want to gauge what they think is important
a bookshelf. Outside combat, the characters don't
or learn more about what they're getting out of
need to take turns, but you need to give each player
the game. If the players miss any important details
a chance to tell you what their character is doing so
in their recap, you can interject a reminder.
you can decide how to resolve everyone's actions. In

ENCOUNTERS combat, everyone takes turns in Initiative order.

‘The bulk of a typical D&D session consists of a se- Srep 3: Descripe WHAT HAPPENS
ries of encounters, similar to how a movie is a series After the players describe their characters’ actions,
of scenes. In each encounter, there are chances for it’s the DM's job to resolve those actions, guided
the DM to describe creatures and places and for by the rules and the adventure you've prepared.
characters to make choices. Encounters can involve So how do you decide? Think through these
exploration (interacting with the environment, in- possibilities:
cluding puzzles), social interaction with creatures,
No Rules Required. Sometimes, resolving a situ-
or combat. The Player's Handbook outlines the gen-
ation is easy. If an adventurer wants to cross an
eral rhythm of play in an encounter. The following
empty room and open a door, you can just say
sections offer more detailed information on how an
that the door opens and describe what lies beyond
encounter typically unfolds, in three steps.
(perhaps referencing your map or notes).
Sep 1: DESCRIBE THE SITUATION Obstacles to Success. A lock, a guard, or som
As the DM, you decide how much to tell the players other obstacle might hinder a character's ability to
and when. All the information the players need to complete a task. In those cases, you typically call
make choices comes from you. Within the rules of for a D20 Test, usually an ability check. For exam-

the game and the limits of the characters’ know!- ple, a successful Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check
edge and senses, tell players everything they need might be needed to pick the lock, while a success-
to know. ful Charisma (Persuasion) check and some coins,
might be needed to bribe the guard. The “Resolv-
ing Outcomes” section in chapter 2 gives more
Published adventures often include text in a box guidance on how to use D20 Tests and other tools
like this, which is meant to be read aloud to the to determine the results of characters’ actions.
players when their characters first arrive at a Roleplaying. When the players interact with other
location or under a specific circumstance, as de- creatures, roleplay those creatures based on
scribed in the text. It usually describes locations whether they are Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile.
so the players know what's happening and have a Improvise based on what you know about the
sense of what their characters’ options are. creatures, their knowledge, and their motivations.
Then bring these creatures to life as you describe
what happens. (See the “Running Social Interac-
tion” section in chapter 2 for more advice.)

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

One Action at a Time. The rules about actions in players that and move on. Don't make the players
the Player’s Handbook limit how many things a spend time discussing which character cooks what
character can do at once. Keeping those rules in for dinner unless they enjoy such descriptions. It's
mind can help you adjudicate situations. OK to gloss over mundane details and return to the
Combat. In combat, many situations involve attack action as quickly as possible.
rolls or saving throws. The rules of combat can Expect players to discuss the events of the game,
help you determine the effectiveness ofa charac- spend time planning, and engage in long conver-
ter’s actions. The “Running Combat” section in sations in character. You don't need to be involved
chapter 2 offers advice on combat. in those discussions unless they have questions for
Spellcasting. If a character casts a spell, you can you. Learn to recognize the times when you can
usually let the player tell you what the spell does take a break as the DM, and then resume the action
and how to resolve it. If questions arise, read the as soon as everyone's ready.
text ofthe spell yourself—how a spell is supposed
to work is usually pretty clear. The general rules ENDING A SESSION
of spellcasting in the Player’s Handbook are also ‘Try not to end a game session in the middle of an
essential for resolving a spell’s effects. encounter. It’s difficult to keep track of information
Exceptions Supersede General Rules. General such as Initiative order and other round-by-round
rules govern each part ofthe game, but the game details between sessions. An exception to this
also includes class features, spells, magic items, guideline is when you purposely end a session with
monster abilities, and other elements that can a cliffhanger, where the story pauses just as some-
contradict a general rule. When an exception and thing monumental happens or some surprising turn
a general rule disagree, the exception wins. For of events occurs. A cliffhanger can keep players in-
example, it's a general rule that melee weapon trigued and excited until the next session.
attacks use the attacking character's Strength Ifa player missed a session and you had that play-
modifier. But ifa feature says that a character can er’s character leave the party for a while, make sure
make melee weapon attacks using Charisma, that that there's a way to bring the character back when
exception supersedes the general rule. the player returns. Sometimes a cliffhanger can

When narrating results, try to give a flavorful serve this purpose: the character charges in to help
description while clearly communicating what's their beleaguered companions.
happening in the language of the game. See the Allow a few minutes at the end of play for every-
“Narration in Combat” section in chapter 2 for more one to discuss the events of the session. Ask your
advice and examples. players what parts of the session they liked and
Describing results often leads to another decision what they would have liked to see more. Take notes
point, which returns the flow of the game to step 1. on what happened and the situation at the end of
the session so you can refer back to those notes as.
PASSING TIME you prepare the next session.

The game has a rhythm and flow that includes peri-
ods of action and excitement interspersed with lulls. EXAMPLE OF PLAY
Think of how movies show time passing between These pages present a short example of play, similar
scenes. When an encounter ends, you can move to the ones in the Player's Handbook, to illustrate
on to the next one. You can often gloss over hours how everything outlined in the “How to Run a Ses-
of travel with a quick narrative summary (see the sion” section works in practice. In this example, the
“Travel” section in chapter 2 for more advice). Sim- Dungeon Master is running an adventure (“The
ilarly, if a rest period passes uneventfully, tell the Fouled Stream") from chapter 4. The four players
eeee are Amy (playing Auro, a Halfling Rogue), Maeve
TAKING BREAKS (playing Mirabella, an Elf Wizard), Phillip (play-
When you finish a lengthy combat encounter ing Gareth, a Human Cleric), and Russell (playing
ora tension-filled scene, or if you need time to Shreeve, a Goliath Fighter).

think, take a quick break. Give your brain a few The DM starts by asking the players to recap the
moments to refocus, relax, or prepare for the action ofthe previous session, most of which con-
next encounter, It’s OK to leave the players in sisted ofcreating characters.
suspense during a break while you figure out the
consequences of their actions.
~ =

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

Jared (as DM): Last session, we met our four heroes
in the little farming village of High Ery. Who re-
members what happened?
Amy: We were at a village council meeting about the
weird stuff
in the river making the fish inedible. We
volunteered to investigate.
Russell: So we set out and followed the river up-
stream. At the first fork, we met a treant named
Borogrove who pointed us to a cave that was the
source of the polluted stream
Amy: Before he wandered off, he gave us a magic
acorn, and that’s where we ended last week.
Jared: So now you're in this gloomy forest. Dry
leaves rustle under your feet. You're still beside
the stream, which looks murky and unwholesome
beneath the shadowy trees. What do you want to
do now?
Russell (as Shreeve): We continue upstream? (The
others nod.)
ed: OK, you make your way upstream for about
another hour. The farther you go, the murkier and
stinkier the water becomes. Rounding a bend, you
can see a cave in the hillside ahead of you. The
stream tumbles from the cave mouth. There are
withered shrubs clumped around the cave, appar-
ently poisoned by this nasty water.
Phillip (as Gareth): Into the cave!
@ Jared: Who's leading the way? The DM knows something the players don’t:
fered shrubs are actually monsters.
Russell: I'll go first.
It’s important to establish which characters
Jared: The cave entrance is ten feet wide, with the
are closest to the hidden monsters.
stream running right down the middle. Do you
want to go single file or two abreast?
© philip: | don’t love the idea of stepping across the
stream. Let’s go single file, staying on this side of
the water. (Everyone else agrees.)
Jared: OK, who's second?
By asking the players to choose their char-
Phillip: Gareth will go second. acters’ marching order, the DM cleverly
Maeve (as Mirabella): pivots away from the withered shrubs. The
Amy (as Auro): I'll make sure nothing's following us. players don't realize their characters are
Jared: OK, Shreeve, as you reach the cave mouth, in danger, and the DM is waiting for the
you hear the shrubs rustling. right time to reveal the hidden monsters.
Russell: Oh, | should’ve checked to make sure noth-
ing was hiding in the shrubs!
Jared: In fact, the shrubs themselves are moving.
They're not rooted at all—each one has two little
legs and sharp claws! Everyone, roll Initiative.
The DM rolls Initiative just once for all
Russell: How many shrubs are attacking?
six monsters and writes down that they'll
© Jared: Six. Auro, what's your Initiative?
go on Initiative count 17. The DM then
Amy: | got a 14.
goes around the table to get each player's
Russell: Shreeve goes on 5. Initiative roll, See the “Running Combat”
Maeve: A natural 20 gives me a 21! section in chapter 2 for advice about roll-
Phillip: 19 for Gareth. ing and tracking Initiative
Jared: Mirabella, you're first. What do you do?

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS 1"

Maeve: How many ofthese walking bundles ofkind-
ling can | get in a 15-foot Cone?
The DM doesn't have the exact posi-
6 Jared: There are three on your side ofthe stream and
tions of the monsters mapped out on a
three on the other side. You can get either group
grid, but it's fair to assume that they're
in your Cone.
clumped close together as they move to
Maeve: Mirabella puts her thumbs together and
attack the characters.
wiggles her fingertips. (Maeve mimics this action.)
Fire shoots out from her fingers, catching the ones
on our side of the stream. Burning Hands!
‘©
Jared: OK, what do! need to'do?
It's always fair for the DM to expect
Maeve: The shrub things need to make Dexterity
players to explain what their spells and
saving throws. The DC is 14.
abilities do. The DM has enough to keep
track of Jared: And how much damage do they take?
Maeve: (Maeve rolls 3d6 for the spell’s damage.) 13
Fire damage if they fail the save, 6 if they succeed.
Jared: Magical fire tears through them and leaves
smears of ash behind! Anything else, Mirabella?
‘Asking for the spells damage allows the
Maeve: My work here is done. (She mimes blowing
DM to roll a saving throw for each mon-
ster and mark off the right amount of smoke away from herfingertips.)
damage for that one. In this case, though, Jared: Gareth, you're up next.
the monsters have Vulnerability to Fire Gareth holds his Holy Symbol and utters an
damage (because they're just dry shrubs) imprecation while pointing at the closest shrub
and so few Hit Points that they'll die no and casting Toll the Dead. The sound of a bell tolls,
matter what they roll, and the shrub makes a lom save, DC 14.
Jared: Well, | rolled a1.
Phillip: It takes 7 Necrotic damage!
Jared: Whatever moisture was in this “bundle of
It’s not Shreeve's turn, but the DM de- kindling” seems to dry up, and the thing keels over
Cides to allow the Goliath Fighter to step dead. Anything else, Gareth?
in the way of the monster's attack because Phillip: He glares menacingly at the other shrubs.
it gives Shreve a fun heroic moment. Jared: OK, their turn. One skitters toward Mirabella!
‘The DM changes the monster's target to
Russell: Can | interject myself between it and Mira=
Shreeve and makes an attack roll
bella?
Jared: Sure, I'll allow it. You step into the monster's
path and... (The DM makes an attack roll for the
THe RULE OF FuN ‘monster but rolls a 7, which isn't going to hit.) lt
D&D is a game, and everyone should have fun tears at your cloak but fails to wound you. The oth-
playing it. Everyone shares equal responsibility er one has lost any interest in fighting, and it starts
in moving the game along, and everyone | running away. Now it's Auro’s turn,
contributes to the fun when they treat each other ‘Amy: Auro looks at the one that just attacked
with respect and consideration: talking through
Shreve and pulls out his dagger. | get a 23 to hit!
disagreements among players or their characters,
Jared: That hits! What's your damage?
and remembering that arguments or mean-
Amy: Since Shreeve is next to it, | can use my Sneak
spirited squabbles can get in the way of the fun.
Attack! The shrub takes 12 Piercing damage.
People have many different ideas about what
makes D&D fun. The “right way” to play D&D is Jared: It's felled! Mirabella, the last one is running

the way you and your players agree to and enjoy. away. Will you let it escape?
Ifeveryone comes to the table prepared to con- Maeve: | think Borogrove would be disappointed in
tribute to the game, the entire table is likely
to us if we let it escape into the woods. I'll cast Fire
have a wonderful and memorable time. Bolt, getting a 14 to hit,
Jared: You nailed it.
Maeve: It takes 10 Fire damage!
Jared: Yeah, the last shrub is inerated. Well done!

12 CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

Every DM Is UNIQUE ATMOSPHERE
The preceding example of play shows how one Dun- Some DMs use music to create an appropriate
geon Master might run an encounter, but no two atmosphere for their game sessions. They might
DMs run the game in exactly the same way—and use soundtracks from adventure movies or video
that's how it should be! You'll be most successful as games, although classical, ambient, or other music
a DM if you choose a play style that works best for styles can also work well.
you and your players. Some DMs adjust lighting or use sound effects,
Miniatures and dioramas can contribute to the
Pray STYLE game's atmosphere and help players visualize
Here are some questions that can help you define events. Check with your players, though: some

your unique style as a DM and the kind of game you might find music, lighting, or sound effects distract-
want to run: ing; might prefer not to be startled by loud noises;
or might need to avoid certain lighting effects.
Hack and Slash or Immersive Roleplaying? Does
the game focus on combat and action or on a rich DELEGATION
story with detailed NPCs?
If there are parts of the game you prefer not to han-
All Ages or Mature Themes? Is the game for all
dle yourself, assign them to players who enjoy them.
ages, or does it involve mature themes?
Ifyou don't want to break your narrative stride by
Gritty or Cinematic? Do you prefer gritty realism,
looking up a rule, designate another player to be the
or are you more focused on making the game feel
rulebook reference expert. If you don't like tracking
cinematic and superheroic?
Initiative, ask another player to do so.
Serious or Silly? Do you want to maintain a seri-
ous tone, or is humor your goal? LEARNING BY OBSERVING
Preplanned or Improvised? Do you like to plan
One of the best ways to learn how to run a D&D
thoroughly, or do you prefer to improvise?
‘game is to observe other DMs in action. Another
General or Thematic? Is the game a mixture of
DM can give you a solid foundation for understand-
themes and genres, or does it center on a particu-
ing the role—as well as inspire you with cool things
lar theme or a genre such as horror?
you can do in your games.
Morally Ambiguous or Heroic? Are you comfort-
‘You can use these questions to help you reflect on
able with moral ambiguity, such as allowing the
a game you observe:
characters to explore whether the end justifies the
means? Or are you happier with straightforward Beginning the Session. How did the DM start the
heroic principles, such as justice, sacrifice, and session? Was there a recap?
helping the downtrodden? Body Language. What gestures did the DM use
when describinga scene? How did the DM’s body
House RULES language change when playing different NPCs?
House rules are new or modified rules you add to DM Voice. Did the DM use different voices or man-
your game to make it your own and to enhance the nerisms for NPCs? Did the DM change the pitch
style you have in mind for your game. Before you or tempo of narration in different situations?
establish a house rule, ask yourself two questions: Player Participation. Did the players participate in
the world-building or make decisions that seemed
~ Will the rule or change improve the game?
to send the adventure in an unexpected direction?
~ Will my players lik
How did the DM handle it?
If you're confident that the answer to both ques- Rules Adjudication. To what extent did the DM
tions is yes, give the new rule a try. Present house ean on the rules to adjudicate outcomes? Did the
rules as experiments, and ask your players to pro- DM adjudicate situations wisely or in ways that
vide feedback on them. If you introduce a house made the game fun to watch?
rule that isn’t fun, remove or revise the rule. ‘Three Pillars. How much ofthe session was taken
up by combat, exploration, or social interaction?
RECORDING RULES INTERPRETATIONS Tone and Mood. How would you describe the tone
if. question about the interpretation ofa rule and mood of the game? Did it change over the
comes up in your game, record how you decide to course of the session?
interpret it. Add that to your collection of house ‘Turns of Phrase. Were there any words or bits of
rules so you and the players can reference it when narration you really liked? (If so, jot them down.)
the rule comes up again later. World-Building. What elements of the DM's world
or the adventure grabbed your attention?

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

GAME EXPECTATIONS

DM NAME:

PLAYER NAME:

GAME THEME AND FLAVOR

POTENTIALLY SENSITIVE ELEMENTS
EXAMPLES: SPIDERS, SNAKES, DEMONS, ROMANCE, MIND CONTROL

| X HARD LIMIT: DON'T MENTION OR INCLUDE he
> SOFT LIMIT: HANDLE WITH CARE OR OFF-CAMERA

PLAYER'S HOPES AND EXPECTATIONS
WHAT D0 YOU WANT TO SEE IN THIS CAMPAIGN?

AT-THE-TABLE CONCERNS
| EXAMPLES: SHOUTING, SWEARING, ALCOHOL, SHARING DICE

ENSURING FUN FOR ALL DMs and players can have phobias or triggers that
others might not be aware of. Any in-game topic or
Ahead of the game, if you haven't done so already,
theme that makes a member of the gaming group
discuss with your players the experience you're all
feel unsafe (a hard limit) must be avoided. If a topic
hoping for, as well as topics, themes, and behavior
or theme makes one or more players nervous but
that might spoil someone's enjoyment of the game.
they consent to include it in-game (a soft limit),
incorporate it with care, if at all, and be ready to
MurTvat REsPECT
quickly veer away from it if needed.
Whether you're playing with long-time friends or Common in-game limits apply to topics such
strangers, i's important to create a foundation as intraparty romance, sex, exploitation, racism,
of mutual trust. The best games happen when enslavement, and violence toward children and
everyone at the table feels safe enough to be them- animals. Limits can also apply to certain creatures,
selves, speak up, and get into character. such as spiders, snakes, rats, and demons. It’s also
It’s up to everyone to uphold the principles of re- important to discuss limits around what harm
spect. Difficult conversations often fall on the DM might befall characters, including mind-control
to lead, but they don't have to. If one player’s behav- magic, helplessness, and death.
ior is interfering with everyone else’s enjoyment, That said, D&D is a game that has in-world con-
everyone has a stake in helping to resolve the issue. flicts and mayhem. Certain core elements of the
game are difficult to ignore. For example, taking
SETTING EXPECTATIONS
damage isn’t a limit you can work around easily.
Before you assemble a group around a game table,
Similarly, character death is something that hap-
pitch the adventures you're thinking about running
pens from time to time, though the game has ways
to your prospective players. Note the in-world con-
to counteract or avoid it (see “Death” in chapter 3
flicts that might arise, the setting’s overall tone, and
for suggestions).
the themes you'd like to explore. (The "Every DM Is
Unique” section earlier
in this chapter can help you
UsING THE GAME EXPECTATIONS SHEET
describe your game to others.)
Telling players what to expect prepares them as The Game Expectations tracking sheet is a tool
they imagine what sorts of characters they could you can use to set expectations at the start of a
game and ensure the game is fun for everyone.
create and launches conversations about content to
be embraced and avoided. You don't need to reveal Before distributing the sheet to players, fill in
the major plot points or twists in your story, but the two topmost boxes:
share the themes you're interested in exploring, the Game Theme and Flavor. in this box, broadly de-
kinds of stories you're inspired by, and which fla- scribe the directi
vors of fantasy (outlined in chapter 5) interest you. See the “Setting Expectations” section for the
Being transparent with your players allows them to kinds of information to include here.
decide if this is a game they want to play, which is Potentially Sensitive Elements, If you know that
best to know before play begins. some elements of the game might run up
Being clear about your expectations and making against some players’ limits, list those elements
sure you understand your players’ expectations in in this box. See the “Hard and Soft Limits” sec-
return can help ensure a smooth game. Take your tion for examples.
players’ opinions and desires seriously, and make
Once the above information is added, give a copy
sure they take yours just as seriously. Ideally, you'll
ofthe sheet to each player. Players can fill out
find a style of play that suits everyone.
their sheets anonymously, but ask each of them
Harb AND Sort Limits to add the following information:

Beyond the general themes and flavors of fantasy Limits. Using an X for a hard limit or a question
you're interested in exploring in your campaign, it's mark fora soft limit, indicate any potentially
important to have a conversation with your players sensitive elements that are problematic. Add
about topics that can be sensitive or uncomfortable. any other elements to avoid.
It can be helpful to discuss these topics in terms of Hopes, Expectations, and Concerns, In the last.
soft and hard limits: two boxes, share any hopes and expectations
for the game, and list any concerns about be-
+ A soft limit applies to a topic that should be
handled carefully, as it might create unwelcome
havior at the table.
anxiety, fear, or discomfort. Collect all the sheets, and gather your players’
+ Ahard limit applies to a topic that should not be ts into a separate, anonymous document the
mentioned or described. whole group can access.
~ a |

CHAPTERI|THERASIOS 15 |

X=

afi

Conrvicrs serween cuanacrens

Communicating Limits. Make sure everyone is players know their needs best, and update the game
comfortable with how the discussion of limits takes accordingly.
place. Players might not want to discuss limits Limits in Play. Since D&D is improvisational, the
aloud, especially if they're new to roleplaying games game can go in unexpected directions. It’s helpful
or haven't spent a lot of time with other members to have an agreed-on signal that players can use to
of the group. One way to alleviate such discomfort communicate that a limit has been violated, allow-
is to provide a way for players to share limits anon- ing you to adjust quickly. That signal might be
a
ymously. Everyo
canne
jot down their limits on an gesture (such as crossing the arms in an X or raising
anonymous survey, such as the Game Expectations a palm in a “stop” gesture), a code word or phrase,
tracking sheet in this chapter. touching or lifting a designated object, or anything
Compile limits into a that can be shared with group agrees on. Players should also feel
the group. Limits aren't negotiable, and everyone in safe to say “stop” and pause the game until the issue
the group needs to respect them. is resolved. The person who invokes the signals can
The start ofa campaign is a great time to have comment on what they want adjusted but doesn't
this discussion, but further discussion is warranted have to explain why the content is objectionable.
each time a new player joins the group or when The signal shouldn't trigger a debate or discussion:
the campaign has a shift in story or tone. Someone thank the player for being honest about their needs,
might cross a line and need to be reminded ofa set the scene right, and move on.
limit, or someone might not think to include some Make it clear to players that if a person isn’t com-
of their limits in the initial discussion. Players can fortable using the signal, they can step away from
also discover new limits as the campaign unfolds. the game or call for a break to talk to you privately.
Check
in with the group every few sessions to make Players may also give a friend permission to use the
sure everyone's comfortable with how the game i signal on their behalf. As the DM, lead by example.
developing, updating the group's limits as needed. Take your players’ needs seriously, and use every
Shifting Limits. Encourage players to bring any tool at your disposal to adjust how your shared
additional limits to you, privately or in the mo- story plays out,
ment, so you can add them to the list. Trust that

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

INTRA-PARTY CONFLICT what every character is doing, especially during
When there's conflict between characters in an ad- periods of exploration and social interaction, rather
venturing party, it’s usually a sign that one of three than focusing just on one player's character.
things is going on: Sometimes you'll encounter players who tell other
players what their characters should do, claim the
Disruptive Player. A player is exhibiting antisocial
best magic items for themselves, bully the other
behavior in the game. How to deal with it is cov-
players, and refuse to share the spotlight. Away
ered in the “Antisocial Behavior” section.
from the game, point out that the player's behavior
Player Conflict. Conflicts between characters
is spoiling the fun for others, and ask the player to
sometimes surface conflicts between players.
tone it down. If the player refuses to change this
These conflicts are best handled away from the
behavior, ask the player to leave the group.
gaming table. Encourage the players to resolve
Some problems arise when a player assumes that
their conflict outside the game. If that conflict
their particular style of play is superior to others,
keeps arising at the game table, you might need
and they lose patience with encounters tailored to
to ask them to step away from the campaign for a
other players’ preferences. Remind the impatient
while or leave the game entirely.
player (perhaps away from the table) that you have
Roleplaying. Conflicts between characters aren't
a group to please, not just one player.
always bad. It’s OK for characters (and players)
to disagree about how to deal with a captured en- Tracie Limits
emy or which side to back in a brewing war. If the Some players resist getting invested in the world
disagreement gets too heated, take a break and of the game because they don't want to endure the
perhaps discuss, out of character, how the players pain of seeing the people and places they care about
would like to proceed. threatened or destroyed. Other players gleefully
If you can't tell which of these dynamics is in play, detail a backstory full of beloved NPCs, fully ex-

have a conversation with the players about it. pecting the DM to use those people as bait, tragic
victims, and unexpected villains. It’s important to
RESPECT FOR THE PLAYERS understand your players’ preferences so you neither
alienate the players by callously destroying what
Your players need to know from the start that you'll
they love nor bore them by leaving their backstory
run a game that is fun, fair, and tailored for them;
out of the campaign story.
that you'll allow each of them to contribute to the
When you have antagonists threaten the people
story; and that you'll pay attention to them when
and places the characters love, be sure the charac-
they take their turns. Your players also count on
ters have a chance to stave off the worst outcome.
you to make sure an adventure’s threats don't target
During the game, characters should have the op-
them personally. Never make players feel uncom-
portunity to avoid or mitigate losses in heroic ways,
fortable or threatened.
with tragedy being a consequence of the characters’
SHARING THE SPOTLIGHT actions and decisions, not a foregone conclusion.
As the DM, don't play favorites. Don't let one player Moments of helplessness in the face of devastating
do all the talking, and make sure you check in about tragedy are better suited for character backstories.

DM Dre Rotino
Do You Reatty Do THat?
Should you hide your die rolls behind a DM screen,
‘Can players retract what they just said their char-
or should you roil your dice in the open for all the
acters did? Some DMs take a hard-line position:
players to see? Choose either approach, and be con-
“Ifyou said it, your character ” Such a strict
sistent. Each approach has benefits:
position tends to make players much more care-
ful about what they say, which can dampen the Hidden Die Rolls. Hiding your die rolls keeps them
atmosphere and discourage humor. mysterious and allows you to alter results if you
‘Other DMs let players change their minds ‘want to. For example, you could ignore a Critical
freely. This creates a more relaxed mood at the Hit to save a character's life. Don't alter die rolls
table, which might slow the pace of the game. too often, though, and never let the players know
A.common compromise is to rule that players when you fudge a die roll.
can retract or change anything their characters Visible Die Rolls. Rolling dice in the open demon-
did up until the point they learn the conse- strates impartiality—you're not fudging rolls to
‘quences of their actions. Once you describe what the characters’ benefit or detriment.
happens as a result, it's too late for the players to Even if you usually roll behind a screen, it can
change their minds.
be fun to make an especially dramatic roll where
everyone can see it.

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS
y

Overty Cautious PLAYERS for advice on this topic.) In exchange, the players
Overly cautious players can slow down the game by should go along with those hooks. It’s OK for your
checking every flagstone, door, and wall in a dun- players to give you some pushback on why their
geon for traps and hidden dangers. Sometimes this characters should want to do what you're asking
behavior is a learned response to too many unpleas- them to do, but it’s not OK for them to invalidate
ant surprises in past adventures, and sometimes it’s the hard work you've done preparing the adventure
just a manifestation of players’ personalities. by willfully going in a different direction.
Here are some in-game techniques you can use to If you feel like you're keeping up your end of the
encourage your players to act boldly: bargain but your players aren't, have a conversa-
tion with them away from the gaming table. Try to
Avoid Random Perils. Avoid traps and ambushes
understand what hooks would motivate their char-
that feel random and have little importance to the
acters, and make sure the players understand the
rest of the adventure.
work you put into preparing adventures for them.
Create Time Pressure. Set up a situation where the
characters are racing toward a goal or destination. Ruts Discussions
(Use this technique with caution, as time pressure Work out a policy about rules discussions at the
can increase players’ anxiety.) table. Some groups don't mind putting the game on
‘Telegraph Encounters. Give players advance warn- hold while they discuss different interpretations of
ing that an encounter is imminent. Maybe they arule, Others prefer to let the DM make a call and
hear the heavy footfalls of a giant or see a dragon continue playing. If you gloss over a rules issue in
flying overhead before they have to confront it. play, make a note of it and return to the issue later.
This can encourage your players to move toward Some players like to use the rules to argue against
or away from the encounters rather than anx- your decisions. While such players can be helpful
iously anticipating an ambush. when you're stuck or make a rules mistake that's

If these in-game techniques don't have the desired easily corrected, players who argue the rules too
often can disrupt the flow of the game.
effect, have a conversation outside the game with
your players about which game elements are caus- Ifa player wants to pause play to find a specific

ing them to play in an overly cautious way. Come to rule or reference, you can invite the player to search
for it while you and the rest ofthe players continue
an agreement that those elements won't appear in
your game, as keeping the game moving will result the game. That player's character essentially steps

in a better experience. out of the game for as long as it takes. Monsters.
don't attack the character, and the character takes
RESPECT FOR THE DM the Dodge action in combat until the player rejoins
the group. This solution allows the other players
‘As the DM, you have the right to expect your play-
to keep playing instead of letting one player stop
ers to respect you and the effort you put into mak-
the game.
ing a fun game for everyone. The players need to let
you direct the campaign (with their input), arbitrate CHARACTER KNOWLEDGE
the rules, and settle arguments. And when you're
Encourage players to play their characters within
narrating the action of the game, the players should the limits of what the characters know and under-
be paying attention. stand, It can be helpful to maintain the distinction
between player and character knowledge by simply
PLavER Diz ROLLING
asking players, “What do your characters think?”
Players should roll their dice in full view of every-
Anachronistic thinking is another potential pit-
one. Ifa player scoops up their dice before anyone
fall. You might need to remind players that their
else can see what they rolled, encourage that player
characters don’t know how to make things that
to be less secretive.
don't exist in the game world, such as modern fire-
When a die falls on the floor, do you count it or
jotics, and they don’t have the players’
reroll it? When it lands cocked against a book, do
understanding of modern science (which might not
you pull the book away and see where it lands or
apply in the game universe anyway).
reroll the die? Work with your players to answer
Similarly, sometimes a player is familiar with the
these questions, and record the answers as house
published adventure you're running or knows the
rules.
Monster Manual backward and forward. Encourage
Tue SoctaL ConTRACT OF ADVENTURES the player to keep that knowledge separate from
You must provide reasonably appealing reasons their character's knowledge and allow the other
for characters to undertake the adventures you players to discover it through play.
prepare. (See “Draw In the Players” in chapter 4

18 CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR Setting clear expectations is essential when deal-
People often play D&D because it lets them, through ing with this kind of rules exploitation. Bear these
their characters, do things they can’t do in real principles in mind:
life—fight monsters, cast spells, and so on. However,
Rules Aren't Physics. The rules of the game are
for some players, this means wreaking havoc in
meant to provide a fun game experience, not to
towns or betraying their allies. What they want in
describe the laws of physics in the worlds of D&D,
the game has nothing to do with heroic adventure,
let alone the real world. Don’t let players argue
but with using the game rules to act out antisocial that a bucket brigade of ordinary people can
fantasies.
accelerate a spear to light speed by all using the
If this behavior comes up in your game, it might
Ready action to pass the spear to the next person,
be time to reopen the conversation about the kind
in line. The Ready action facilitates heroic action;
of game you want to play. If it’s just one player
it doesn't define the physical limitations of what
causing the trouble, it’s perfectly appropriate to
can happen in a 6-second combat round.
issue an ultimatum: an out-of-control player who
‘The Game Is Not an Economy. The rules of the
‘wants to continue playing with the group must stop
game aren't intended to model a realistic economy,
being disruptive and play as part of a team. Don't
and players who look for loopholes that let them
let players get away with being jerks to the other
generate infinite wealth using combinations of
players using the excuse, “that's what my character
spells are exploiting the rules.
would do.
Combat Is for Enemies. Some rules apply only
Evil Characters. Players who want to play evil
during combat or while a character is acting in
characters might be looking to carry out antisocial
Initiative order. Don't let players attack each other
behavior in the game. Ifa player asks for permis-
or helpless creatures to activate those rules.
sion to play an evil character or comes to the table
Rules Rely on Good-Faith Interpretation. The
with one already made, talk to that player about
rules assume that everyone reading and interpret-
what they have in mind and make sure their plans
ing the rules has the interests of the group's fun at
square with the group's expectations for your game.
heart and is reading the rules in that light.
Sometimes a player wants to explore playing an evil
character for perfectly good (and nondisruptive) Outlining these principles can help hold players’
reasons, and sometimes a whole group decides it exploits at bay. Ifa player persistently tries to twist
might be fun to play evil characters together. These the rules of the game, have a conversation with that
are valid options, as long as everyone's on the same player outside the game and ask them to stop.
page about how the campaign will go.
RULES FOR THE VIRTUAL TABLE
PLAYERS EXPLOITING THE RULES Setting expectations is just as important in a digital
Some players enjoy poring over the D&D rules and environment as in person.
looking for optimal combinations. This kind of op Some groups confine out-of-character jokes,
mizing is part of the game (see “Know Your Players’ comments, and memes to a text channel, keeping
in chapter 2), but it can cross a line into being ex- the voice channel focused on the game. But some
ploitative, interfering with everyone else's fun. groups find it distracting to have a separate conver-
sation unfolding in text while the game is going on.
KNowine THE RULES Choose an option that works best for your group.
You don't have to be an expert on the rules to be ‘Who moves tokens on a virtual tabletop? Are
2 good DM. Of course it’s helpful to be familiar players expected to use the built-in dice roller, or is
with the rules, especially the ones in the Player's it OK to roll physical dice and report the result? The
‘Handbook, but facilitating fun is more important particular technology you're using might dictate
than implementing the rules perfectly. If you're answers to these questions or raise other questions
not sure how to apply the rules in a situation, you'll need to sort out as you play.
you can always ask the opinion of the players
as a group. It might take a few minutes, but it's
usually possible to reach an answer that feels fair
to everyone, and that’s more important than a
“correct” answer.
You don’t need to know every spell in the Play-
er’s Handbook or the features ofevery class. Set
the expectation that players are responsible for
telling you what their abilities and spells do.

CHAPTER 1 | THE BASICS

CHAPTER 2

RUNNING THE GAME
UILDING ON THE BASICS LAID OUT IN EXPLORING
chapter 1, this chapter goes into more depth
Players who desire exploration want to experience
on running a D&D game as Dungeon Master.
the wonders that a fantasy world has to offer. They
want to know what's around the next corner or hill
KNow YOuR PLAYERS and like to find hidden clues and treasure.
While your players’ role is to create characters (the Engage players who like exploration by ...
protagonists of the campaign), breathe life into
them, and steer the campaign through their actions, + Dropping clues that hint at things yet to come.

your role as Dungeon Master is to keep the players + Letting them find things when they take the time
to explore.
immersed in the world you've created and to give
the characters the opportunity to do awesome + Providing evocative descriptions of exciting envi-

things. ronments and using interesting maps and props.
+ Giving monsters secrets for the players to uncover
Knowing what your players enjoy most about the
or cultural details for them to learn.
D&D game helps you create and run adventures,
that they will enjoy and remember. Once you know
FIGHTING
which ofthe following activities each player in your
‘group enjoys, you can tailor adventures to your Players who enjoy fantasy combat like the excite-
players’ preferences, ment of battling villains and monsters. They thrive
It’s rare to gather a table of players who all enjoy in situations that can best be resolved in combat, fa-
the same aspects of the game. The trick is to find a voring bold action over negotiation or investigation.
balance so everyone can get some enjoyment out of Engage players who like fighting by...

each game session, even if certain encounters don't + Springing unexpected combat encounters.
match their preferences. At best, a group of players + Vividly describing the havoc their characters
is a lot like their characters, in that having different wreak with their attacks and spells.
interests and capabilities enables them to handle a + Including combat encounters with large numbers
broad range of challenges. of less powerful monsters.

ACTING INSTIGATING
Players who enjoy acting like to embody their Players who like to instigate action are eager to
characters’ personalities, perspectives, and atti- make things happen, even if that means taking per-
tudes. They might like dressing up or using their ilous risks. They would rather rush headiong into
characters’ voices while playing. They enjoy social danger and face the consequences than cautiously
interactions with NPCs, monsters, and their fellow plan their actions.
party members. Engage players who like to instigate by.
Engage players who like acting
by ...
+ Allowing their actions to affect the environment.
+ Giving them opportunities to develop their + Including things in your adventures to tempt
characters’ personalities and backgrounds. them.
+ Allowing them to interact regularly with NPCs. + Letting th actions put the characters in a tight
+ Highlighting the roleplaying elements of combat spot.
encounters. + Including encounters with NPCs who are as feisty
+ Incorporating elements from their characters’ and unpredictable as the players are.
backstories into your adventures.
OPTIMIZING
Players who enjoy optimizing their characters’
capabilities like to fine-tune their characters for
peak performance by gaining levels, new features,
and magic items. They welcome any opportunity to
demonstrate their characters’ excellence.

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

Engage players who like optimization by ... game. These players want to participate, but they
tend not to care whether they're deeply immersed
+ Using desired magic items as adventure hooks and
in the adventure, and they don't tend to be assertive
rewards.
or very involved in the details ofthe game, rules, or
+ Including encounters
that let them leverage their
story. Asa rule, don't try to force these players to be
characters’ most potent abilities.
more involved than they want to be.
+ Providing quantifiable rewards, e Experience
Points, for noncombat encounters. STORYTELLING
PROBLEM-SOLVING Players who love storytelling want to contribute to
anarrative. They like it when their characters are
Players who want to solve problems like to scruti-
heavily involved in an unfolding story, and they
nize NPC motivations, untangle a villain's machina-
enjoy encounters that are tied to and expand an
tions, solve puzzles, and come up with plans.
overarching plot.
Engage players who like to solve problems by
Engage players who like storytelling by ...
+ Including puzzles and tricky situations that
+ Using their characters’ backstories to shape the
require thinking.
stories of the campaign.
+ Rewarding planning and tactics with in-game
+ Making sure encounters advance the story.
benefits.
+ Making their characters’ actions steer future
+ Creating NPCs with complex motives.
events.

SOCIALIZING ing NPCs characteristics and connections that
the adventurers can explore to uncover new ad-
Many groups include players who come to the game
venture opportunities.
primarily because they enjoy the social event and
+ Including plot elements that call back to decisions
want to spend time with their friends, not because
the adventurers made earlier.
they're especially invested in any part of the actual

IRERENT ASPECTS OF PLAVING DED

Group SIZE LARGE Groups
D&D’s rules and published adventures generally The biggest considerations with large groups are
assume four to six players plus the DM. The follow- maintaining order at the table and keeping combat
ing advice helps you adjust adventures to work for from becoming too slow.
smaller or larger groups.
Party LEADER
SMALL Groups Consider having the players designate a party
leader, who is then the only person who tells you
A group that contains fewer than four players might
what the group is doing. It becomes the leader's role
find combat encounters difficult, especially if the
to work with the rest of the players to find consen-
party lacks important capabilities (such as armored
sus on what the group will do.
characters to stand toe-to-toe with enemies or
healing magic to keep everyone alive). You can com- SPEEDING COMBAT
pensate by reducing the number of monsters in a Players who have to wait a long time between their
combat encounter or by giving the party resources characters’ turns in combat are susceptible to dis-
they need, such as Potions of Healing. traction. Consider these tips to speed combat with a
You can also add party members, as described in large group.
the sections that follow. Be Generous with Information. If you tell the play-
ers what the Armor Class of their opponents is, you
DM-CoNnTROLLED ADVENTURER
reduce the steps of interaction needed to resolve an
You can make an adventurer character of your own
attack. Instead of telling you a number and asking
(sometimes called a “DM PC’—a “Dungeon Master
if it hits, a player can simply tell you that an attack
player character’) to accompany the party. This i
hits and how much damage it deals, perhaps adding
rewarding way for you to roleplay with your friends
some narration for good measure (see “Narration
while they're exploring your world, but keep in
in Combat" later in this chapter). In the same way,
mind that you'll have to run this NPC in combat.
if you know each character's AC, you don't need to
Be sure to keep the players’ characters in the spot-
ask whether a monster's attack hits.
light, and don't take away the players’ agency by
Help Players Keep Up. If a player isn't sure what to
having your character make decisions for the group,
do on their turn in combat, help the player decide by
NPC Party MEMBERS offering a quick recap of the state of the battle. How
You can add nonplayer characters (NPCs) to the many foes are still standing, and how hurt do they
adventuring party. Use the NPC stat blocks in the look? What's the most immediate threat to that
Monster Manual to represent these supporting char- character?
acters. If you don't want to run these NPCs yourself, Make Initiative Obvious. Display the Initiative
invite one or more ofyour players to take on an order to your players so they each know when their

NPC asa secondary character. These NPCs might character's turn is coming up and can think ahead
be apprentices or employees ofthe adventurers, about what their character will do on their next
so it's natural for the main characters to take the turn, Using Initiative scores (see “Running Combat”
lead in exploration and social interactions while the in this chapter)—and perhaps seating the players in

NPCs fade into the background. Initiative order—can be helpful with a large group.
See “Nonplayer Characters” in chapter 3 for more Roll Handfuls of Dice. Encourage players to roll
information. the dice for their attack rolls and their damage at
the same time. You can do the same.
PLAYERS WITH MULTIPLE CHARACTERS
One or more ofyour players can each play two STRUCTURED TURNS
characters. Running two characters at once is a If you find yourself
in a situation where individual
challenge, so make sure those players are comfort- players are having trouble getting a chance to do

able taking on multiple characters. things during exploration or social interaction, have
‘This approach works best in a game that's the characters roll Initiative and act in Initiative or-
focused on combat, since it fills out a party with der, just as you do in combat. Taking turns ensures

combat-capable characters. It can be difficult for a that everyone has the chance to do something. Use

player to roleplay two characters at once. You might this approach sparingly, as it can feel artificial and
suggest that the player focus on roleplaying one sometimes slows down the game.
character while relegating the other character to a
supporting role.

CHAPTER 2| RUNNING THEGAME 23,

AovENTURES REQUIRING STEALTH, LIKE

a or

ABSENT PLAYERS Give absent characters the same XP that the other
characters earned each session, keeping the group
When one of your players is absent, what do you do
at the same level
with that player's character? Consider the following
ne groups like to work out a policy regarding
options:
how many missing players is too many to proceed.
Fading into the Background, Have the character For example, your group might play as long as no
simply fade into the background. TI more than one person is absent. If two or more peo-
eryone to step out of the gam ple can't attend a session, consider playing a short
pend disbelief, but it might be the easiest solution. adventure with different characters, and perhaps a
Act as if the character were absent, but don't try different Dungeon Master, or bring out a favorite
to come up with any in-game explanation. Mon- board game
sters don't attack the character, who returns the
favor. On returning, the player resumes playing as, INCORPORATING NEW PLAYERS
if the absence never happened. When introducing a new player to the group, revi
Narrative Contrivance. Decide the character is the group’ tions and limits (see
elsewhere while the rest of the party continues Fun for All” in chapter 1), Then have the new pl
the adventure. Come up with in-game reasons for create a character who is the same level as the other
the character to temporarily leave the party and characters in the adventuring party.
rejoin later, such as following up on a rumor or If the new player has never played D&D before
reporting back to the party's patron. and the rest of the group is higher than level 4,
Substitute Player. With the absent player's consent, consider taking a short break from the campaign
have another player run the missing player’s char- and having everyone play a new level I character
acter, or run the character yourself
if you feel you fora session or two while the new player learns the
can do so. Whoever runs the character will need ropes. (This can also be a good opportunity for an-
a copy of that character’s character sheet and other player to take a turn as DM)
should strive to keep the character alive and use If you're incorporating a new character into the
that character's resources wisel group in the middle of an adventure, work with that
character's player to come up with a story hook fo

2 | RUNNI
|APTER GAME
THE NG

how their character joins the group, and make sure
CONCURRENT CAMPAIGNS
the player is happy with the choice. Suggested story
hooks include the following: You and the other DMs in your group can take
turns running adventures for a few weeks or
Long-Lost Friend. The new character is a friend or
months at a time, with your campaign on hold
relative of one of the adventurers. Alternatively,
during another DM's turn, Some groups play mul-
the new character is connected to the adventur-
tiple times each week, with different DMs running
ers’ patron or a member of an organization the
their campaigns on different days.
other characters are linked to. In either case, the
new character has been searching for the grou SHARED WoRLD
p,
perhaps bearing important news.
Some groups take a large, established campaign
Rescued Prisoner. The new character is a pris
setting and divide it up geographically so different
oner of the foes the other characters are fighting.
DMs can run separate campaigns in the same set-
When rescued, this character joins their group.
ting. In theory, characters can travel from one DM's
Sole Survivor. The new character is the sole sur-
region of the world to another's, creating continuity
vivor of an ill-fated group of adventurers. The
in the campaign even as characters might be in-
new character might be able to offer a clue to help
volved in several plotlines.
the party avoid the same grim fate that befell the
Rather than dividing a campaign geographically,
other group.
you and the other DMs in your group could di-
SPECIAL Gust STARS vide it thematically. Using the setting in chapter 5

The story hooks for incorporating new players can of this book as an example, each DM could focus
also work for occasions when you want to bring a their campaign on one ofthe three overarching
player into the group for conflicts of that setting. This approach allows the
a single session. For ex-
ample, you might have a friend visiting from out of same group of adventurers to sink their teeth into
town who wants to join your game briefly. Or per- all three overarching conflicts while ensuring that

haps you have a player you're thinking about adding ‘each storyline feels distinct,
to the group, but you want to make sure they'll be
a good addition. Incorporating an occasional guest
Joint DMs
player is also a great way to maintain a roster of ‘Two or more DMs can share the creation of
a single
players as backup in case one of your regular play- campaign, working together to maintain continu-
ers has to drop out of the game. ity from session to session and making sure that
each DM's adventures advance the larger story of
MULTIPLE DMs the world and the characters. When players who
are also DMs are playing their characters, they
Many gaming groups switch DMs from time to
shouldn't let their knowledge of the campaign's
time. The following sections describe situations that
story influence their characters’ actions, Those
allow for multiple DMs and ways multiple DMs can
characters step out of the action when their players
add to the group's fun.
take their turns as DM.
OccasIonaL BREAKS Joint DMs can also team up to run each session of
a campaign, with each DM focusing on
Take a break from being the DM if you need to re-
the aspects of the game they most
charge your creative juices, plan out the next arc of
enjoy or the DMs trading focus
your campaign, or finish up the adventure you'
re from session to session, One DM
working on. By taking
a break, you create an oppor-
might run combat description
tunity for another player to assume the DM role for
and keep a battle moving
a session or two.
while the other focuses on
If not everyone can make it to a scheduled session,
miniatures and music.
that can also be an opportunity for a different DM
The two DMs can play
toruna short adventure,
two different NPCs
VARIETY SERIES in a social interaction
encounter. Between
Some groups don’t want a long camp:
sessions, they can col-
sweeping plotlines; they prefer short, unconnected
laborate or divide up
adventures. With that style of game, different play-
world-building, en-
ers might take turns as DM for one to three ses-
counter creation, and
sions at a time, with each adventure standing asa
other tasks,
self-contained story.

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME
25

Don't Limit Options. In general, let the players use
NARRATION the information they're given to decide what they
Using a few time-honored narrative techniques, you want to do. Don't put unnecessary limitations on
can immerse your players in your world and bring the characters’ actions. That said, it can be helpful
the game to life. (especially with new players) to offer suggestions:
“You can go through the door, search the chest, or
LEAD BY EXAMPLE
look down the shaft.” Just make sure to finish by
When you roleplay and narrate with enthusiasm, saying, “or anything else you can think of!”
you add energy to the game and draw your players
Don't Assume Character Actions. Don't assume
into the world. Encourage the players to describe actions on the characters’ part. For example, don't
their characters’ actions, then incorporate their
say “You step into the room and look up” unless
narration into your accounts of the characters’
the player has already told you that’s what their
successes and failures.
character is doing.

BREVITY SECRETS AND DISCOVERY
Keep your descriptions short and evocative. Fo-
In the course of an adventure, the players and their
cus on the more important information to keep
characters will uncover information that was previ-
players’ interest and to highlight important clues ously unknown to them. Make sure the information
and details. Players need to know about significant
they need to complete the adventure is obtainable.
features their characters can perceive—especially Don't hide important secrets or discoveries in
things like monsters in a room—before they decide
places where the characters aren't likely to uncover
what to do. Allow your players to ask follow-up them. Make sure they can't miss an important se-
questions, and provide additional description as
cret or discovery simply by failing an ability check,
needed.
not talking to the right person, or not looking in the
right place.
ATMOSPHERE
See also “Perception” in this chapter for more ad-
Bring a place to life by adding touches of atmo- vice on hidden secrets in adventures.
sphere, such as a lingering smell ofash, tiny beetles
skittering along the dungeon floor, or blue flowers GIVING INFORMATION TO ONE PLAYER
blossoming in the otherwise desolate and gloomy When one character separates from the rest of the
graveyard. Pick a couple of senses (sight, hearing, group, it’s usually OK to let the rest of the players
smell, touch, or taste) to highlight. know what happens, assuming the separated char-
Describe changes in the environment to direct acter will update the rest of the party when they're
your players’ attention. For example, a bird alighting reunited. You might need to remind the other play-
on a gravestone might draw the characters’ atten- ers that their characters aren't present, so they can't
tion to it. offer advice or information to the lone character.
Sometimes, though, you'll want to give informa-
DRAW PLAYERS’ ATTENTION tion to just one player. It might be information you
Good narration invites the players to examine de- think the character won't want to share with the
tails of the environment that lead to encounters or rest of the party, perhaps something related to ele-
important information. Anything you describe with ments of the character's history that are still secret.
extra, subtle details draws the players’ attention. In this case, you can use one of these methods to
Give them just enough to invite further exploration, deliver that information:
but don't create the equivalent of a flashing neon
Aside to Player. Pull the player into another room,
sign reading “This way to adventure!”
or have the other players leave the room. This
‘When using narration to guide your players, keep
approach is best if there's a whole scene that plays
the followinin
g mind:
out with just one character involved. Try to keep
Distinguish Options. When presenting options these scenes brieso
f other players don’t get bored
to players, add details to distinguish the options. or feel left out.
Should the characters take the left path ot the Secret Message. If you just have a simple piece of
right path? Perhaps the left path smells of rot information to convey, you can whisper to the
and decay, while the faint sound of lapping water player, pass a note to them, or send them a text or
comes from the right. These details give players a direct message.
more information to make an informed decision
without explicitly telling them where to go.

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

RESOLVING OUTCOMES
Checks, and Saving Throws table for guidance.
You decide when a player makes a D20 Test based
Also consider whether a skill or tool proficiency
on what the character is trying to do. Players
might apply to an ability check.
shouldn't just roll ability checks without context;
What's the DC? Based on how hard you think the
they should tell you what their characters are tr
task should be, set the DC as follows: 10 for an
ing to achieve, and make ability checks only if you
easy task, 15 for a moderately difficult task, or 20
ask them to.
for a hard task.
When a situation comes up and you're not sure
how to adjudicate it using the rules, use these four The sections that follow offer advice on how to use
questions to help you decide: each kind of D20 Test, when to apply Advantage
and Disadvantage, and how to decide what the con-
Is a D20 Test Warranted? If the task is trivial or
sequences of success or failure might be.
impossible, don't bother with a D20 Test. A char-
acter can move across an empty room or drink
ABILITY CHECKS
from a flask without making a Dexterity check,
An ability check is a test to see whether a charac-
whereas no lucky die roll will allow a character
ter succeeds at a task the character has decided to
with an ordinary bow to hit the moon with an ar-
attempt. The Abilities, Ability Checks, and Saving
row. Call for a D20 Test only ifthere's a chance of
Throws table summarizes what each ability is used
both success and failure and ifthere are meaning-
for. (Constitution checks are rare, as tests ofa chai
ful consequences for failure.
acter's endurance are usually passive or reactive,
What Kind of D20 Test? ifa character is actively
making a saving throw more appropriate.)
trying to do something, use an ability check (or
an attack roll if the character is trying to hit
PROFICIENCY
something). If the character is reactively trying to When the rules or a published adventure calls for
avoid or resist something, use a saving throw
an ability check, a skill or tool proficiency is often
Which Ability Does the Test Use? Think about
called out: for example, “a character who succeeds
which ability has the most influence on a chai
ona DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check can puzzle
acter's chance to succeed on the ability check
out the magic involved.” Sometimes the rules allow

CHAPTER
2 | RUNNING THE CAME

Apiuities, ABiLity CHECKS, AND SAVING THROWS
Score Measures ... Make an Ability Check To ... Make a Saving Throw To ...

Strength Physical might Lift, push, pull, or break something Physically resist direct force

Dexterity Agility, reflexes, balance Move nimbly, quickly, or quietly Dodge out of harm’s way

Constitution Health and stamina Push your body beyond normal limits Endure a toxic hazard

Intelligence Reasoning and memory Reason or remember Recognize an illusion as fake

Wisdom _Perceptiveness and Notice things in the environment or Resist a mental assault
mental fortitude in creatures’ behavior
Charisma Confidence, poise, and Influence, entertain, or deceive Assert your identity

charm

for any one of two or more proficiencies to apply Consider using group checks in situations such as
toa check. When deciding what check a character the following:
should make, be generous in determining if the Research Tasks. The characters are trying to learn
character's Proficiency Bonus comes into play. You about an ancient prophecy from an archive. The
might specifically ask for an Intelligence (Arcana)
characters can make a group Intelligence (Investi-
check, or you can ask for an Intelligence check and gation) check to find sources in the archive; char-
let the player negotiate with you to see if one of the acters who are knowledgeable about such topics
character's skill or tool proficiencies applies. and about research methods in general can tell the
TryING AGAIN other characters the most likely places to direct
their search. If the group check is successful, the
Sometimes a character fails an ability check and
characters find enough different sources to paint
the player wants to try again. In many cases, fai
a clear picture of the prophecy; otherwise, their
ing an ability check makes it impossible to attempt
information is incomplete.
the same thing again. For some tasks, however,
Roped Together. The characters are tied together
the only consequence of failure is the time it takes
as they scale a cliff or cross a rickety rope bridge.
to attempt the task again. For example, failing a
If one or two characters fail their checks, the suc-
Dexterity check to pick a lock on a treasure chest
cessful characters can stop their fall and prevent
doesn’t mean the character can't try again, but each
disaster, but if more than half the party fails, the
attempt might take a minute.
whole group falls. You could also apply this idea to
If failure has no consequences and a character can
something like a long swim, where strong swim-
try and try again, you can skip the ability check and
mers can help weaker ones.
Jjust tell the player how long the task takes. Alter-
natively, you can call for a single ability check and Social Situations. One character offends someone
at a diplomatic event, and a noble demands the
use the result to determine how long it takes for the
adventurers be escorted from the premises. The
character to complete the task.
characters can make a group Charisma (Persua-
Group CHECKS sion) check to avoid getting thrown out; they just
Group checks are a tool you can use when the party need a few convincing arguments and the ability
is trying to accomplish something together and the to smooth over any gaffes. You could apply this
most skilled characters can cover for characters same principle to other Charisma checks using
who are less adept at the task. To make a group abil- Deception, Intimidation, or Performance.
ity check, everyone in the group makes the ability
check. If at least half the group succeeds, the whole
PASSIVE CHECKS
Ability checks normally represent a character's
group succeeds. Otherwise, the group fails.
active effort to accomplish something, but occa-
Group checks aren't appropriate when one char-
acter's failure would spell disaster for the whole sionally you need a passive measure of how good a
party, such as if the characters are creeping across character is at doing
a thing. Passive Perception is
the most common example. (See “Perception” later
a castle courtyard while trying not to alert the
guards. In that case, one noisy character will draw in this chapter.) You can extend the concept ofa

the guards’ attention, and there’s not much that passive ability check to other abilities and skills.
stealthier characters can do about it, so relying on For example, if your game features a lot of social
interaction, you can record each character's Passive
individual checks makes more sense. Similarly, don’t
use a group check when a single successful check is Insight score, calculated in much the same way as
Passive Perception: 10 plus all modifiers that nor-
sufficient, as is the case when finding a hidden com-
mally apply to a Wisdom (Insight) check.
partment with a Wisdom (Perception) check.

28 CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

ATTACK ROLLS somewhere in the middle, such as 17 or 18 for a
task that is a little easier than “hard.”
In combat, an attack roll is used to determine
Very Hard and Nearly Impossible. A DC 25 task is
whether an attack hits.
almost out of reach for low-level characters, but
You can also use attack rolls to resolve noncombat
more reasonable after level 10 or so. Low-level.
activities that are similar to attacks in combat, such
characters have no chance to accomplish a DC 30
asan archery contest or a game of darts. Assign an
task, while a level 20 character with proficiency
Armor Class to the target, decide whether the char-
and a relevant ability score of 20 still needs a 19
acter is proficient with the weapon used, then have
or 20 on the die roll to succeed at a task of this
the player make an attack roll. (See also “Degrees of
difficulty.
Success” in this chapter)
If you're setting the DC for a saving throw, don't
Savinc THRows go lower than 10 or higher than 20. Ifa creature is
In contrast to an ability check, a saving throw is an the source of the effect forcing a saving throw, use
instant response to an effect and is almost never the standard formula for calculating a save DC (see
made by choice. A saving throw makes the most “Calculated DCs” below).
sense when something bad threatens a character
Caxcutatep DCs
and the character has a chance to avoid or resist it.
For some ability checks and most saving throws, the
Most ofthe time, a saving throw comes into play
rules default to the following formula:
when an effect—such as a spell, monster ability, or
trap—calls for it, telling you what kind of saving DC =8 + ability modifier + Proficiency Bonus
throw is involved and providing a DC for it.
This formula often sets the saving throw DC when
In other situations that call for a saving throw, it’s
a creature is casting a spell or using a special abil-
up to you to decide which ability score is involved.
y, but it can also apply to ability checks that are
The Abilities, Ability Checks, and Saving Throws
contests between two creatures. For example, if
table offers suggestions.
one creature is holding a door shut, use its Strength

Dirricuty CLass modifier and Proficiency Bonus to set the DC for
opening the door. When another creature tries to
You establish the Difficulty Class for an ability force the door open, the creature makes a Strength
check or a saving throw when a rule or an adven-
(Athletics) check against that DC.
ture doesn't give you one. Choose a DC from the Another way to handle similar situations is to
‘Typical DCs table based on the task’s difficulty. have one creature's ability check set the DC for
another creature's check. That’s how hiding works,
Typicat DCs
for example: a hiding creature's total Dexterity
Task pc Task pc (Stealth) check sets the DC for Wisdom (Percep-
Very easy 5 Hard 20 tion) checks made to find the hidden creature.

Easy 10 Very hard 25
ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE
Moderate 15 Nearly impossible 30 Advantage and Disadvantage are among the most
The task difficulties are explained below: useful tools in your toolbox. They reflect temporary
circumstances that might affect the chances of a
Very Easy. Most people can accomplish a DC 5 task
character succeeding at a task. Advantage is also a
with little chance of failure. Unless circumstances
great way to reward a player who shows exceptional
are unusual, let characters succeed at such a task
creativity in play.
without making a check.
Characters often gain Advantage or Disadvantage
Easy, Moderate, and Hard. These are the most
through the use of special abilities, actions, spells,
‘common difficulties, and you can run your game
or other features of their classes or species. In other
using only them. A character with a 10 in the as-
cases, you decide whether a circumstance would
sociated ability and no proficiency will succeed at
merit Advantage or Disadvantage.
an easy task around 50 percent of the time. For a
‘As described in the Player's Handbook, if different
moderate task, a character needs either a higher
circumstances would give both Advantage and
score or proficiency to have a similar chance of
Disadvantage in the same situation, the Advantage
success, whereas a hard task typically requires
and Disadvantage cancel out, regardless of how
both to have a similar chance. If you can't de:
many circumstances would grant Advantage or
between two levels ofdifficulty, choose a DC
Disadvantage.

CHAPTER 2|RUNNINGTHEGAME 29

ADVANTAGE DEGREES OF SUCCESS
Consider granting Advantage when ... A successfull D20 Test can have degrees of success.
For example, when characters participate in an ar-
ances not related to a creature's own
chery contest, you might decide that the more an
ies provide it with an edge.
attack roll exceeds the target's AC, the higher the
+ Some aspect of the environment improves the character's score. The archery target might have
character's chance of success. AC II, but it has five concentric rings indicating de-
A player shows exceptional creativity or cunning
grees of success. So you could decide that an attack
in attempting or describing a task, roll of 11 or 12 lands in the outermost ring, a 13 or 14
+ Previous actions (whether taken by the character hits the next ring closer to the center, a 15 or 16 hits
making the attempt or some other creature) im-
the third ring, a 17 or 18 hits the fourth, and a 19 or
prove the chances of success.
higher strikes the bull's-eye.

DISADVANTAGE CRITICAL Success OR FAILURE
Consider imposing Disadvantage when ... Rolling a 20 or a 1 on an ability check or a saving
+ Circumstances hinder success in some way. throw doesn't normally have any special effect.
+ Some aspect of the environment makes success However, you can take such an exceptional roll into
less likely. account when adjudicating the outcome. It's up to
« An element ofthe plan or description of an action you to determine how this manifests in the game.
makes success less likely. ‘One approach is to increase the impact of the suc-
cess or failure, For example, rolling a 1 on a failed
CONSEQUENCES attempt to pick a lock might jam the lock, and roll-
‘Asa DM, you can use a variety of approaches when ing a 20 on a successful Intelligence (Investigation)
adjudicating success and failure to tailor the game check might reveal an extra clue.
to your liking. For attack rolls, the rules cover what happens
‘ona natural 20 (it’s a Critical Hit) or a natural 1 (it
Success aT A Cost always misses). Resist the temptation to add addi-
When a character fails a D20 Test by only1 or 2, tional negative consequences to a natural 1 on an
you can offer to let the character succeed at the cost attack roll: the automatic failure is bad enough. And
‘ofa complication or hindrance. Such complications characters typically make so many attack rolls that
can run along any of the following lines: they're bound to roll dozens of natural 1s over time.
‘What might seem like an interesting consequence,
+ A character gets her sword past an enemy's de~
like breaking the weapon used for the attack, will
fenses and turns a near miss into a hit, but she
quickly get tiresome.
then drops the sword.
+ Acharacter narrowly escapes the full brunt of a
IMPROVISING DAMAGE
Fireball spell but has the Prone condition.
+ A character fails to intimidate a kobold prisoner, The Improvising Damage table gives guidelines for
secrets anyway while determining damage on the fly.
ing at the top of its lungs, alerting other
ImPRovISING DAMAGE
nearby monsters.
Damage Examples
By putting the choice of success at a cost in the
players’ hands, and even letting them choose the 1410 Burned by coals, hit by a falling bookcase,
setbacks, you can give players more agency in craft- pricked by a poison needle
ing the story of their characters’ deeds. 2d10 Struck
by lightning, stumbling into a
firepit
DEGREES OF FAILURE
Sometimes a failed D20 Test has different conse- 4410 Hit by falling rubble in a collapsing
‘quences depending on the degree of failure. For tunnel, tumbling into a vat of acid
example, a character who fails to disarm a trapped 10d10 Crushed by compacting walls, hit by
chest might accidentally spring the trap if the check whirling steel blades, wading through lava
fails by 5 or more, whereas a lesser failure means Submerged in lava, hit by a crashing fiy-
18d10_
the trap wasn't triggered during the botched disarm
ing fortress
attempt. Consider adding similar distinctions to
other checks. Perhaps a failed Charisma (Persua- 24d10 Tumbling into a vortex of fire on the
sion) check means a queen won't help, whereas a Elemental Plane of Fire, crushed in the
failure of5 or more means she throws the character jaws ofa godlike creature or a moon-size
in the dungeon for such a display of impudence. monster

go 2 | RUNNIN
CHAPTER G
THE GAME

‘The Damage Severity and Level table is a guide to An equally important principle is “No, but
how deadly these damage amounts are for charac- Sometimes characters can’t do what their players
ters of different levels. Cross-reference a character's want, but you can keep the game moving forward
level with the damage being dealt to gauge the se- by offering an alternative,
verity of the damage. For example, imagine the characters are search-
ing for a lich's lair. A player asks you if there's a
DAMAGE Severity AND LeveL mages' guild operating in a nearby city, hoping to
Character Levels Nuisance Deadly find records that mention the lich. This wasn't a
possibility you anticipated, and you don't have any-
1-4 5 (1d10) 11 (2410)
thing prepared for it. One option is to say yes and
5-10 11 (2410) 22 (4d10) use the tools at your disposal to create a suitable
116 22 (4d10) 55 (10d10) mages’ guild. By doing this, you reward the player
for thinking creatively. Also, the guild can become a
17-20 55(10d10) 99 (18d10)
great source for adventure hooks.
Nuisance damage rarely poses a risk of death to Another option is to say no, but a solitary mage in
characters of the levels shown, but a severely weak- town might possess the desired information. This
ened character might be laid low by this damage. approach rewards the creative player while de-
Deadly damage poses a significant threat to char- manding less work from you.
acters of the levels shown and could potentially kill
such a character that’s missing many Hit Points.
AIDS TO IMPROVISATION
‘When you need to make up something on the
IMPROVISING ANSWERS spot—say, a mages’ guild in a town where you hadn't
previously planned for one—you have abundant
With a little preparation and a lot of flexibility, you
resources to draw on:
can handle any curveball your players throw at you.
One ofthe cornerstones of improvisational + Lists of NPC names (se “Nonplayer Characters”
theater is called “Yes, and ..” It’s based on the idea in chapter 3)
that an actor takes whatever the other actors give + Random tables (such as the ones in the “Settle-
and builds on that. A similar principle applies as you ments” section of chapter 3)
run sessions for your players. As often as possible, + Campaign journal (described in chapter 5)
weave what the players give you into your story. + Maps (see appendix B)

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME 31

RUNNING in social interactions, so let those players take the
spotlight and inspire the other players by their ex-
SocIAL INTERACTION ample. However, be sure to tailor aspects of social
During a social interaction, the adventurers usually interactions to fit the other players’ tastes too.
have a goal. They want to extract information, se- Involve Specific Characters. If you have players
cure aid, win someone's trust, escape punishment, who don't readily get involved in social interactions,
avoid combat, negotiate a treaty, or achieve some you can create situations tailored for their charac

other objective. Successfully completing the en- ters. Pethaps the NPC in question is a family mem-
counter means achieving that goal. ber ora contact of a particular adventurer and fo-
Some DMs run social interaction as a free-form nn on that character. Some NPCs might
roleplaying opportunity, where dice rarely come pay particular attention to characters with whom
into play. Other DMs resolve interactions by having they feel kinship.
characters make Charisma checks. Most games fall Ifa couple of players are doing most of the talking
somewhere in between, balancing roleplaying with ina social interaction, take a moment now and
the occasional ability check. then to involve someone else. You might have an
NPC address another character directly: “And what
ROLEPLAYING about your hulking friend? What will you pledge in
You don't need to be a practiced thespian or come- exchange for my favor?” Ifa player is less comfort-
dian to create drama or humor through roleplaying. able with roleplaying, you can get them involved by
The key is to pay attention to the story elements asking them to describe their character's actions
and characterizations that make your players laugh during the conversation.
or feel emotionally engaged and to incorporate Use Other Ability Scores. Consider the following
those things into your roleplaying. additional possibilities to give characters whose
Charisma is not their strong suit a chance to shine:
NPC Portrayats
Strength. An NPC won't talk to the characters until
When thinking about how to roleplay an NPC or a
one of them agrees to an arm-wrestling match.
monster, consider one or two adjectives that best
Ora strong character needs to bodily prevent the
describe the creature. Knowing the creature's align-
NPC from running away.
ment can also help with your portrayal. The classic
Dexterity. An NPC is Hostile toward intruders, so
advice for writers holds true: show, don't tell, For
the characters must talk from hiding. Or the so-
example, rather than describe an NPC as jocular
cial interaction provides a distraction that allows
and honest, have the NPC make frequent puns and
a character to get close enough to the NPC to steal
freely share personal anecdotes.
something from the NPC's pockets.
You can further enhance your portrayal ofa
Intelligence. An NPC's speech is so full of obscure
creature in the following ways.
references to a particular area of knowledge that
Use Facial Expressions. Your facial expressions
help convey a creature's emotions. Smile, scowl,
the characters can't use the information they re-
i they interpret those obscure facts. Or
snarl, yawn, or pout, as appropriate.
the NPC refuses to give a direct answer, speaking
Use Motions and Posture. Movement and posture
only in vague hints that the characters must piece
can help define an NPC's personality. You might
together to get the information they seek.
reflect an archmage's displeasure by rolling your
Wisdom. An NPC is hiding something important,
eyes and massaging your temples with your fingers.
and the characters must read the NPC's nonverbal
Hanging your head and looking up at the players
cues to understand what's true and what
conveys a sense of submissiveness or 's decep-
fear. Holding
tion. Or key information is concealed in details
your head and chin high conveys confidence.
around the room where the interaction takes
Use Voices. Changing the volume of your voice
place, which a perceptive character might noti
and borrowing speech patterns from real life, mov- ce.
ies, or television can make NPCs distinctive.
ATTITUDE
ENGAGING THE PLAYERS Each creature controlled by the DM has one
of
Although some players enjoy roleplaying more than the following attitudes toward the adventurers:
others, social interactions help immerse all play Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile. The “Monster Be-
ers
in the game. Consider the following approaches to havior” section in chapter 4 offers guidance to help
make an interaction-heavy game session appeal to you determine a creature's initial attitude.
players of any tastes. Characters can shift a creature's attitude by thei
r
Appeal to Player Preferences. Players who like act- words or actions. For example, buying drin
ks for
ing (see “Know Your Players” in this chapter) thri an Indifferent group of miners might shif
ve t their

32 CHAPTER
2 | RUNNING THE GAME

attitude to Friendly. When a shift occurs, describe it
to your players. For example, the miners might di
play their newfound friendliness by imparting some
useful information, offering to repay the kind g¢
ture at a future date, or challenging the characters
toa friendly drinking contest.

AsILity CHECKS IN SoctAaL INTERACTION
You decide the extent to which ability checks shape
the outcome of a social interaction. A simple social
interaction might involve a brief conversation and
a single Charisma check, while a more comple:
encounter might involve multiple ability checl
helping to steer the course of the conversation.

UsING THE HELP ACTION
When a character uses the Help action to help
another character influence an NPC or a monster,
encourage the player ofthe helpful character to
contribute to the conversation or, at the very least,
describe what their character is doing or saying to
contribute to the other character's success.

RUNNING EXPLORATION
‘Traversing a wilderness, searching a dungeon, cir-
cumventing an obstacle, finding a hidden object,
vestigating a strange occurrence, deciphering clues,
solving puzzles, and bypassing or disabling traps
are all part of exploration.
Not everything in your world needs to be ex-
plored painstakingly. For instance, you might gloss
over an unimportant journey by telling the play
that they spend three uneventful days on the road
before reaching the next point ofinterest.

Usinc
A Map
A map can help you or your players visualize a lo-
cation or region that the characters are exploring.
D&D maps come in three varieties, with examples of
all three found in appendix B and on the poster map:

Dungeon Maps. D&D uses the word “dungeo
loosely to describe any adventure location that
has interior spaces to explore (such as a castle,
tower, mansion, or subterranean complex). A
dungeon map shows passages, chambers, door
and other important features of a location.
Settlement Maps. A map of a settlement often
shows terrain (cliffs, trees, streams, and so forth)
in addition to buildings, bridges, and other im-
portant features
Wilderness Maps. A wilderness map shows roads,
ivers, terrain, and other features that might
guide the characters on their travels or lead them
astray. The area shown on a wilderness map might
be as big as a continent or as small as a glade.

Exeionar

Often a map is intended for the DM's eyes only. You Most combat encounters take less than 1 minute (10
can copy portions ofa DM's map to share with your rounds), but it’s fair to round up to a whole minute
players asa visual aid while omitting details that in most cases, assuming characters take a few sec-
should remain hidden from them. Virtual tabletops onds to pull themselves together after a fight.
often use “fog of war” and similar effects to obscure Use similar principles to track the passage of
areas and features on the map that you want to hours, such as when characters disguise them-
keep hidden from the players. selves with a Seeming spell for 8 hours to infiltrate
Maps designed for use with miniatures (see “Min- a stronghold. In this case, it takes a lot of small
iatures” in this chapter) tend to be player facing, tasks—or something like a Short Rest—to occupy a
revealing nothing that would spoil the adventure. full hour.

TRACKING TIME ACTIONS IN EXPLORATION
If tracking the passage of time is important during Most of what characters do during exploration,
exploration, use a time scale appropriate for the sit- aside from movement, relates to just a few actio
uation at hand: Search, Study, and Utilize. Characters also often use
the Help action to assist each other in these actions.
Rounds. In combat and other fast-paced situations, Other actions come up only rarely.
the game relies on 6-second rounds. It’s seldom necessary to rely on the action rules
Minutes. In a dungeon or settlement, movement during exploration, except to remember that a char-
happens on a scale of minutes. In the Free City acter can do only one thing at a time. A character
of Greyhawk, getting from the Silver Dragon Inn who's busy taking the Search action to look for a se-
to the wharf takes about 10 minutes, whereas it cret door can't simultaneously take the Help action
takes about I minute to creep down a 200-foot- to assist another character who's taking the Study
ong hallway, another minute to check for traps action to find important information in a book.
on the door at the end of the hall, and 10 minutes
to search the chamber beyond for anything inter- TAKING TURNS
esting or valuable. Often, characters spread out across a room to inves-
Hours. A scale of hours is often appropriate for tigate the elements ofthe room. (The exploration
short wilderness treks. Adventurers eager to example in chapter 1 of the Player's Handbook shows
reach the lonely tower 20 miles away, at the heart this dynamic in action.) In such situations, have
of the forest, can hurry there in 5 hours’ time. the characters take turns, though it’s usually not
Days. For long journeys, a scale of days works best. necessary to roll Initiative as you would in a combat
Following the road from Veluna City to the Free encounter. Resolve one character's actions before
City of Greyhawk, the adventurers cover 96 miles moving to the next.
in 4 uneventful days before a bandit ambush in- There's no hard-and-fast rule about how long to
terrupts their journey. spend on each character's activity, but make sure no
one is waiting for their turn for too long.
The exploration rules in the Player's Handbook give
‘You can build tension in an exploration encounter
guidelines for determining travel time based on the
by shifting focus right before a character makes an
characters’ pace. In most cases, it's fine to estimate
ability check or opens a chest, leaving everyone ea-
that time rather than calculating it down to the ger to hear what happens next.
minute. Exceptions include situations like these:
Spell Timer. The characters might need to go some- ABILITY CHECKS IN EXPLORATION
‘where or accomplish something before the dura- When a character tries to do something during ex-
tion of a spell or similar effect runs out. For exam- ploration, you decide whether that action requires
ple, they might use the Locate Object spell to point an ability check to determine success (as described
them in the direction of an item they seek, so you in the earlier “Resolving Outcomes” section).
need to know how far they get in the 10 minutes Certain situations might call for a balance be-
the spell lasts. tween ability checks and roleplaying. For example,
‘Triggered Event. An event might occur at a specific puzzles are an opportunity for players to do some
time. For example, a door might remain open for1 problem-solving, but players can also lean on their
minute after the password to open it is spoken, or characters’ talents and attributes to provide direc-
reinforcements might arrive 2d4 minutes after an tion. A character who succeeds on an Intelligence
alarm is sounded. (Investigation) check might notice a clue that gives
the players a hint to the puzzle's solution.
If the characters spend time working out a puzzle or
talking to an NPC, you can estimate the time spent
by keeping track of how much real time passes.

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

Ins countvano FULLOPMONETERS, WiLL cnaRACTERS
g

PERCEPTION about something under examination. Investigation
applies when characters are trying to figure out
As the DM, you're the interface between your play-
how a thing works—how to open a trick door, how
ers and the world ofthe game. You tell them what
to get into a secret compartment, and so on.
their characters perceive, so it’s important to make
Don't use the Investigation skill to determine if
sure you're telling them important information
a character notices something—that’s the purview
about their surroundings. The Perception skill and
of Perception. For example, a successful Wisdom
Wisdom checks made using it are key tools for you.
(Perception) check allows a character to find a s
This section offers guidance to help you use the
cret door or something that betrays its presence,
Perception rules in the Player's Handbook.
such as thin seams marking the edges ofthe door.
Wen TO CALL For A CHECK If the secret door is locked, a successful Intelligence

An important time to call for a Wisdom (Percep- (Investigation) check would allow a character to fig
tion) check is when another creature is taking the ure out the trick to opening it—by turning a nearby

Hide action. Noticing a hidden creature is never statue so it faces the door, for example.

trivially easy or automatically impossible, so cha
HippeN THINGS IN ADVENTURES
acters can always try Wisdom (Perception) checks
Secret doors, hidden compartments, concealed
to do so.
traps, and stashed treasures are common elements
Using Passive Perception. Sometimes, asking play-
in adventures. When using such elements, if some-
ers to make Wisdom (Perception) checks for thei
thing is hidden, allow for the possibility that the
characters tips them off that there's something they
characters might not find it. It’s fine to hide extra
should be searching for, giving them a clue you'd
treasures or delightful surprises, but don't hide ele-
rather they didn't have. In those circumstances, use
ments that are essential to the characters’ succe:
characters’ Passive Perception scores instead.
places where characters might not find them.
Using the Investigation Skill. The Investigation
Even if the hidden objects aren't essential to the
applies to situations where a character is u:
adventure’s success, plant hints that clue players in
ing reason and deduction to arrive at a conclusion
to the idea that there might be something hidden

CHAPTER 2|RUNNINGTHEGAME 35

for them to find. Such hints can be subtle (a char- TRAVEL
acter hears a strange rattle when opening the desk The rules in the “Exploration” section in the Player's
drawer, suggesting the presence ofa hidden com-
Handbook cover the basics of travel on a scale rang
partment in the back or bottom of the drawer) or ing from minutes to days. The tools in this section
obvious (clear footprints lead across the room to can add excitement to a longer trek.
a blank wall that is actually a secret door). These
hints let players discover fun secrets without re- Journey Sraces
quiring them to spend extensive time searching ev- Tt can be helpful to break up a journey into stages,
ery square foot of every room and hallway. with each stage representing anything from a few
hours’ journey to ten days or so of travel. A journey
PERCEPTION AND ENCOUNTERS might have only a single stage if the trip is a matter
If the characters encounter another group of crea- of followinga clear path to a well-known destina-
tures and neither side is being stealthy, the two tion, A journey consisting of three stages makes for
groups automatically notice each other once they a satisfying trek. For example, the characters might
are within sight or hearing range of one another. travel along a river to the forest's edge (stage 1), fol-
‘The Audible Distance table can help you determine low a trail into the heart of the woods (stage 2), and
the hearing range, and the following sections ad- then search the woods for an ancient ruin (stage 3).
dress visibility. If one group tries to hide from the A long journey might involve even more stages and
other, use the rules in the Player's Handbook. ‘occupy several game sessions.
You decide how to break up the journey, though
Aupiste DISTANCE
your decision can be shaped by the characters’ plan
Noise Distance for navigating the journey. When the characters
Trying to be quiet, 206x 5 feet know the route they must take, the stages of the
Normal noise level 246 x 10 feet journey should correspond to the way you might
give someone directions, as in the example above.
Very loud 246 x 50 feet
Planning the Stages. You can use the accompany-
Visibility Outdoors. When traveling outdoors, ing Travel Planner sheet to plan the stages of a jour-
most characters can see about 2 miles in any ney. (Use multiple copies of the Travel Planner for a
direction on a clear day, except where obstructions journey with more than three stages.)
block their view. That range increases to 40 miles For each stage, note where it starts and ends, the
if they are atop a mountain or a tall hill or are oth- distance covered, and the predominant terrain.
erwise able to look down on the area from a he sht. Choose or randomly determine the weather on that
Lightly Obscured condi ns reduce visibility: rain stage (see “Weather” later in this chapter). Plan
reduces maximum visibility to 1 mile, and fog re- one or more challenges for each stage, such as an
« es
duces it to between 100 and 300 feet.
Outdoor terrain determines the distance at which JOURNEYS wiTHouT DESTINATIONS
characters encounter other creatures. The Travel Sometimes, characters travel without a clear path
Terrain table (see “Travel” below) gives suggested to follow or a clear destination in mind. In such a
encounter distances for different types of terrain. case, use the grid of your map (squares or hexes)
Visibility at Sea. From a ship's crow’s nest, a look- to define the stages ofthe journey, however many
out can see things up to 10 miles away, assuming miles each square or hex might be. (This style of
clear skies and a relatively calm sea. Overcast skies play is sometimes called “hex crawling.”)
reduce that distance by half. Lightly Obscured con- In this kind of wilderness exploration, you can
.duce visibility just as they do on land. take one of two approaches to travel challenges:
ity Underwater. Visibility underwater de- Sandbox Approach, Your map ofthe area deter-
pends on water clarity and the available light. Use mines what characters find when they enter any
the Underwater Encounter Distance table to deter- particular hex on the map. You might have en-
mine the encounter distances underwater. counters or obstacles in place for every hex, or
they could be spread farther apart.
UNDERWATER ENCOUNTER DISTANCE
Random Approach. Use tables to randomly deter-
Encounter Distance mine encounters or obstacles in each hex the
Clear water, Bright Light 60 feet characters enter.

Clear water, Dim Light 30 feet Whichever approach you use, running a journey
Murky water or Darkness 10 feet otherwise works the same as described in the rest
ofthe “Travel” section
el

36 2 | RUNNING THE GAME
CHAPTER

TRAVELPLANNER

ORIGIN: — DESTINATION:

“START: END: OFAST days/hrs
| DISTANCE: TERRAIN: O Normat days/hrs |
| WEATHER: O stow days/hrs

\._ NARRATIVE NOTES CHALLENGES i

[ELAP
TIMESED
coarsjns)

STAGE 2

START: END: O FAST days/hrs. fee
DISTANCE: TERRAIN: O Norma days/hrs :
WEATHER: F ai Ap aBh O stow days/hrs at

NARRATIVE NOTES CHALLENGES

ELAP
TIMESED
omsnns)(___

STAGE 3 i
‘START: END: O FAST days/hrs
DISTANCE: TERRAIN: O NorMAL days/hrs
WEATHER: O stow days/hrs. j

NARRATIVE NOTES CHALLENGES

Be
“a

‘aire

ELAPSED TIME (04ys 85) i

encounter, an obstacle, a search for something hid- chapter
3 for the effects of extreme weather. Adding
den, or a chance of getting lost, as described under weather details to your descriptions of the charac-
“Journey Stage Challenge: ters’ journey can make it more memorable.
‘Running the Stages. For each stage of the journey,
follow these steps in order: WeatHER

Step 1: Set the Pace. Have the players choose their 1420 Temperature
‘group's travel pace for the stage: Slow, Normal, or 1-14 Normal for the season
Fast (see “Travel Pace”). Based on the length of the 15-17 1d4 x 10 degrees Fahrenheit colder
stage (in miles) and the group's pace, determine
18-20 1d4 x 10 degrees Fahrenheit hotter
how long this stage takes to complete.
Step 2: Narrate the Travel. Describe what happens 1420. Wind Precipitation
as the characters complete this stage of their
1-12, None None
journey. Introduce and resolve any challenges (see
“Journey Stage Challenges”). 13417 Light Light rain orlight snowfall

Step 3: Track Food and Water Consumption. Each 18-20 Strong Heavy rain or heavy snowfall
creature in the party expends the appropriate
amount of food and water for the length of the TRAVEL PACE
stage. If the party lacks enough food or water, the A group of characters can travel overland at a Nor-
characters risk dehydration and malnutrition. mal, Fast, or Slow pace, as described in the Player's
Step 4: Track Progress. Track the party's progress Handbook. During any journey stage, the predomi-
at the end of the stage. You might mark their po- nant terrain determines the characters’ maximum
sition on a map of the region and note the elapsed travel pace, as shown in the Maximum Pace column
time on the Travel Planner. of the Travel Terrain table. Certain factors can af-
fect a group's travel pace.
Depending on how you planned the stages, the end
Good Roads. The presence ofa good road in-
ofa stage might mean the characters arrive at a
creases the group's maximum pace by one step
landmark, a waystation, or an adventure location,
(from Slow to Normal or from Normal to Fast).
whether or not it’s their final destination
Slower Travelers. The group must move at a Slow
WEATHER pace if any group member's Speed is reduced to half
During each stage of the characters’ journey, you or less of normal.

can determine what the weather is like by rolling Extended Travel. Characters can push themselves

on the Weather table, adjusting for the terrain to travel for more than 8 hours per day, at the risk
and season as appropriate. Roll 1420 three times of tiring. At the end of each additional hour of
to determine the temperature, the wind, and the travel beyond 8 hours, each character must succeed
precipitation. on a Constitution saving throw or gain 1 Exhaustion
Weather has no significant game effect most level. The DC is 10 plusI for each hour past 8 hours.
of the time, but see “Environmental Effects” in Special Movement. Ifa party can travel at a high
Speed for an extended time, as with a spell such as

TRAVEL TERRAIN

Terrain Maximum Pace Encounter Distance Foraging DC Navigation DC Search DC
Arctic Fast 606 x 10 feet 20 10 10

Coastal Normal 2d10 x 10 feet 10 5 15

Desert Normal 6d6 x 10 feet 20 10 10
Forest Normal 2d8 x 10 feet 10 1s 1s
Grassland Fast 606 x 10 feet 15 5 15

Hill Normal 2410 x 10 feet 1s 10 15
Mountain Slow 4d10 x 10 feet 20 15 20

Swamp Slow 248 x 10 feet 10 1s 20
Underdark Normal 2d6 x 10 feet 20 10 20

Urban, Normal 2d6 x 10 feet 20 15 1s
Waterborne Special! 6d6 x 10 feet 15 10 15

‘*Appropriate equipment (such as skis) is necessary to keep up 2 Fast pace in Arctic terrain.
‘Characters’ rate oftravel while waterborne depends on the vehicle carrying them; see "Vehicles."

CHAPTER
2 | RUNNING THE GAME

Wind Walk ora magic item such as a Carpet of Flying, descriptions with truly fantastical elements. For
translate the party’s Speed into travel rates using example, a forest might be home to tiny dragonets
these rules: instead of birds, or its trees might be festooned with
giant webs or have eerie green, glowing sap. A single
Miles per hour = Speed = 10
fantastic element within an otherwise realistic and
Miles per day (Normal pace) = Miles per hour
memorable landscape is enough.
x number of hours traveled (typically 8)
Use the landscape to set the mood and tone for
Fast pace = Miles per day x 11% (round down)
your adventure. In one forest, close-set trees might,
Slow pace = Miles per day x 2/3 (round down) shroud all light and seem to watch the adventurers
If the characters are flying or their special move- as they pass. In another, sunlight streams through
ment allows them to ignore Difficult Terrain, they the leaves above, and flower-laden vines twine up
can move at a Fast pace regardless of the terrain, every trunk. Signs of corruption—rotting wood,
Vehicles. Characters traveling in a vehicle use the foul-smelling water, and rocks covered with slimy
vehicle's speed in miles per hour (as shown in chap- moss—can be a signal that the adventurers are
ter 6 ofthe Player's Handbook) to determine their drawing close to the site of evil power that is their
rate oftravel, and they don’t choose a travel pace. destination or can provide clues to the nature ofthe
threats to be found there.
NARRATION DURING TRAVEL
Just as movies use travel montages to convey long Journey Stace CHALLENGES
and arduous journeys in a matter of seconds, you Challenges that adventurers might face duringa
can use a few sentences ofdescriptive text to paint journey stage include the following, which are di
a picture of a journey in your players’ minds before cusse
in the sections
d that follow:
moving on. Describe the journey as vividly as you
Encounters with other creatures
like, but keep momentum by focusing on the most
Foraging
notable details that reinforce the desired mood.
Navigation (and becoming lost)
Visual aids can help set the scene for the char-
Obstacles
acters’ travels. Image searches on the internet can
lead you to breathtaking landscapes (in fact, that’s Searches

a good phrase to search for). You can spice up your Tracking

CHAPTER
2 | RUNN NINGTHEGAME 39

Encounters with Other Creatures. The Encounter wrong branch of a river, orient themselves to the
Distance column in the Travel Terrain table gives wrong mountain peak on the horizon, or get turned
the range at which creatures might become aware around in the forest. As a baseline, assume that get-
of each other while journeying through the wilder- ting lost extends the length of the current journey
ness. When staging an encounter, consider these stage by 1d6 « 10 percent. It might also affect subse-
possibilities: quent stages of the journey.
Obstacles. An obstacle is terrain or weather that
Ambush. Monsters set up an ambush along
a route
obstructs the characters’ path. Examples include
they expect travelers to follow.
a cliff, a blizzard, or a forest fire. To get past the
Attack from Above. Flying monsters swoop down
obstacle, characters might need to backtrack and
to attack the characters.
find an alternate route, or they might need to take
Distant Sighting. The characters and monsters
shelter until the obstacle goes away. Let the players
spot each other from a distance in open terrain.
spend time thinking about a solution, then be gener-
Found by Chance. The characters happen upon
ous in adjudicating whether their plan works.
monsters that are camping, eating, hunting, bask-
In addition to the chance of a delay (adding a few
ing
in the sun, walking along the same trail, or
hours, a day, or a couple of days to the current stage
engaged in some other activity.
of the journey), here are some other consequences
Pursuit. The characters are tracking monsters, or
you can impose if characters fail to overcome or
the monsters are tracking them. The encounter
bypass an obstacle:
begins when the two groups get close enough to
interact. Combat Encounter, The characters encounter one
or more Hostile creatures. For example, march-
Foraging. Characters without water and Rations
ing through a burning forest instead of circling
can stave off dehydration and malnutrition by
around it might prompt an encounter with raging
gathering food and water as they travel. A forag-
fire elementals.
ing character makes a Wisdom (Survival) check
Damage. The characters take damage. For example,
once per journey stage (or once per day if a stage
a character who tumbles over a waterfall might
is shorter than a day). The DC is determined by
take Bludgeoning damage. See “Improvising Dam-
the abundance of food and water in the region, as
age” in this chapter for guidelines on determining
shown in the Foraging DC column of the Travel
how much damage is appropriate.
Terrain table. If multiple characters forage, each
Exhaustion. The obstacle fatigues the characters,
character makes a separate check.
causing them to gain Exhaustion levels. For
A foraging character finds nothing on a failed
check. On a successful check, roll 1d6 and add the
character's Wisdom modifier to determine how
Do Pavers NEED To Track RATIONS?
much food (in pounds) the character finds per day You might decide that tracking Rations is unnec-
of the journey stage, then repeat the roll for water essary in your game. Even ifthe characters are in
(in gallons). a desert, you can assume that a character with
Navigation. If the characters aren't following an proficiency in the Survival skill can find enough
established path or traveling with a landmark in food and water to sustain the party. Make sure
sight, they risk getting lost. Here are some circum- you work that into your narration of the journey
stances that can cause a group to lose its way so the player feels good about choosing that skill
proficiency. You can also assume the characters,
+ Branching passages underground
can load their mounts with enough Rations for
+ Horizon-obscuring terrain, such as dense forest
their journey, or they can use magic (such as the
+ Obscuring weather, such as heavy rain or fog
Create Food and Water spell) to sustain them.
+ Traveling at night
On the other hand, having players track Rations
+ Traveling at sea while unable to see the sky or any
‘seems appropriate for a more realistic campaign.
familiar land Characters in such a campaign should approach
Let the players know when the characters are at a long wilderness journey as a challenge in lo-
risk of getting lost, then have the characters choose gistics: how many pack animals do they need to
one of their number to make a Wisdom (Survival) carry the food for the journey, and how do they
check against a DC appropriate to the terrain, as. feed the animals?
shown in the Navigation DC column of the Travel As always, communicate your expectations
Terrain table. Another member ofthe group can about these rules to the players ahead of time. IF
take the Help action to assist this check as normal. you don't plan on tracking Rations, tll your play-
If the check fails, the party goes off course. You ers that before they spend an hour purchasi
decide what this looks like: they might follow the supplies for theirjourney.
~ ~

40 CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

example, marching through a blizzard instead of Shifting Weather or Terrain. The weather or ter-
taking shelter might cause each character to gain rain changes in a way that makes tracking harder.
1d4 Exhaustion levels. Terrain Obstacle. The trail crosses a river or simi-
Another Condition. The obstacle imposes another lar obstacle that allows no tracks.
condition on the characters. For example, wad-
The DC for the check depends on how well the
ing through a fetid swamp rather than skirting
ground shows signs of
a creature's passage. No roll
around it might impose the Poisoned condition,
is necessary in situations where the tracks are obvi-
which lasts until removed by magic.
ous, such as following an army along a muddy road.
Searches. This challenge often comes up in the last Spotting tracks on bare rock is more challenging
stage of a journey: the characters have to find their unless the creature being tracked leaves a distinct
destination, which might be an island, an old mine, trail. Additionally, the passage of time often makes
an ancient ruin, a magical pool, a hag’s cottage, or tracks harder to follow. In a situation where there
some other feature. is no trail to follow, you can rule that tracking is
‘The Search DC column of the Travel Terrain table impossible.
suggests DCs for Wisdom (Perception) checks made Use the Search DC column of the Travel Terrain
to find something in different types ofterrain. You table as a starting point for setting the DC for
can adjust these DCs based on the specific terrain tracking. If you prefer, you can choose a DC based
features and the nature of what the characters are on your assessment of the difficulty—higher if
trying to find, using the guidelines for setting DCs days have elapsed since the creature passed, lower
earlier in this chapter. if the creature is leaving an obvious trail such as
Tracking. A specific instance of searching on a blood. You can also grant Advantage on the check if
journey is when adventurers choose their path by there's more than one set of tracks to follow or Dis-
follo
the
wing
tracks of other creaturesTo
. track, advantage if the trail passes through a busy area.
one or more trackers must succeed on a Wis- On a failed check, the character loses the trail
dom (Survival) check. You might require track- but can attempt to find it again by carefully search-
ers to make a new check in any of the following ing the area. It takes 10 minutes to find a trail ina
circumstances: confined area, such as a series of caverns, or 1 hour
outdoors.
Resting. The trackers resume tracking after finish-
ing a Short or Long Rest.

(0 CHARACTERS TRAVELING,

‘THROUGH THE wiLoeRNess

A hidden list allows you to track combatants who
RUNNING COMBAT haven't been revealed yet, and you can use the list as
This section builds on the combat rules in the Play- a place to record the current Hit Points of monsters,
er's Handbook and offers tips for keeping the game as well as other useful notes.
running smoothly when a fight breaks out. If you use this approach, you tell the players
when it’s their characters’ turn. When you call out
ROLLING INITIATIVE
the character whose turn is starting, consider also
Combat starts when—and only when—you say i mentioning who's next, prompting that character's
does. Some characters have abilities that trigger player to think ahead.
on an Initiative roll; you, not the players, decide if
and when Initiative is rolled. A high-level Barb: Open List
can’t just punch their Paladin friend and roll Ini You can track Initiative on a list that is visible to the
tive to regain expended uses of Rage. players using any of the following tools:
In any situation where a character's actions ini-
+ Awhiteboard on a wall or propped up nearby
tiate combat, you can give the acting character + Abattle mat you use for miniatures
Advantage on their Initiative roll. For example, if'a + Folded index cards for each character and each
conversation with an NPC is cut short because the
group of identical monsters, placed like tents in
Sorcerer is convinced that NPC is a doppelganger
Initiative order across the top of your DM screen
and targets it with a Chromatic Orb spell, everyone + Avirtual tabletop program you're using or a
rolls Initiative, and the Sorcerer does so with Ad-
group text chat
vantage. If the doppelganger rolls well, it might still
+ Magnets, clothespins, or an accessory designed to
act before the Sorcerer's spell goes off, reflecting the
represent the Initiative order spatially
monster's ability to anticipate the spell.
An open list makes everyone aware of the order of
UsinG INITIATIVE SCORES play. Players know when their characters’ turns are
You can get to the action of combat more quickly by coming up so they can plan their actions in advance.
using Initiative scores instead of rolling. You might An open list also lets the players know when the
use Initiative scores just for characters, just for monsters act in the fight, although you can hold off
monsters, or for both, on adding monsters to the list until they take their
Initiative Scores for Characters. A character's Ii first turns.
tiative score is typically 10 plus all modifiers to the
character's Initiative roll (including their Dexterity TRACKING Monsters’ HiT Points
modifier and any special modifiers). If you want During a combat encounter, you or a player should
your players to use Initiative scores, have them track how much damage each monster takes.
record those scores on their character sheets, and Most DMs track damage in secret so their players
keep your own list of those scores. don't know how many Hit Points a monster has
Initiative Scores for Monsters. A monster's stat remaining.
block in the Monster Manual includes its Initiative Ithelps to have a system to track damage for
score after its Initiative bonus. ‘groups of monsters. If you aren’t using miniatures
‘Advantage and Disadvantage. If a creature has or other visual aids, one way to track your monsters
Advantage on Initiative rolls, increase its Initiative is to assign them unique features. For example,
score by 5. Ifit has Disadvantage on those rolls, de- imagine that you're running an encounter with
ccrease that score by 5. three ogres. You might attach descriptions such as
“the ogre with a big scar” and “the ogre with the
TRACKING INITIATIVE
helmet” to help you and your players track which
The following sections describe different methods monster is which. Once Initiative is rolled, jot down
for keeping track of who goes when in combat. each ogre's Hit Points and add notes (and even a
name, if you like) to differentiate each one:
Hippen List
You can track Initiative on a list your players can’t King logren/ scat): 68
see using any ofthe following tools: Thod logren/ helm): 71
+ Paper or a notebook behind the DM screen Mut logre smeeredn/
dirt): 59
+ A spreadsheet or document on a laptop or tablet
If you use miniatures to represent monsters, one
+ An app on your tablet or phone way to differentiate them is to give each one a
+ Index cards for each character and each group of
unique miniature. If you use identical miniatures
identical monsters, placed in Initiative order in a
to represent multiple monsters, you can tag the
stack you cycle through

42 CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

miniatures with small stickers of different colors or
USING AND TRACKING CONDITIONS
stickers with different letters or numbers on them,
For example, in a combat encounter with three Many rules and features in the game apply condi-
ogres, you could use three identical ogre miniatures tions to creatures. You can also apply conditions on
tagged with stickers marked A, B, and C, respec- the fly when it makes sense to do so. For example,
tively. To track the ogres’ Hit Points, you can sort the Poisoned condition can reflect a variety of im-
them by letter, then subtract damage from their pairments, from influenza to intoxication,
Hit Points as they take it. Your records might look You can track monsters’ conditions wherever
something like this after a few rounds of combat: you track their Hit Points. Players should track any
conditions affecting their characters, Character
Ope
A 08 595305
HW dead. conditions can also be marked on index cards ora
GprB- HOH 33 whiteboard.
Gyrl: 59 You might also mark index cards or sticky notes
with conditions and their effects or use tokens or
‘Some DMs prefer to track how much damage a
some other tangible reminder. Then hand the cards,
monster has taken, adding to that number as char-
notes, or tokens to players when their characters
acters deal damage (instead of subtracting from
have a condition. Putting a sticky note with a con-
the monster's Hit Points). Adding is generally easier
dition’s rules on a player’s character sheet can help
than subtracting, and you can track damage on
that player remember the effects of the condition,
a visible list of Initiative (such as a whiteboard)
‘You can also place tokens or colored plastic rings
without revealing to the players how many Hit
(the rings from soda bottle caps work well) on a
Points the monsters have. The tracking might look
creature's miniature, helping everyone remember
like this:
which creatures are affected by conditi
Opeth: 915 238 454 59 dead.
Ope B97 BB
Opet:

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME
43

MINIATURES CREATURE SIZE AND SPACE
A creature's size determines how much space it
Often, players can rely on your descriptions to occupies on squares or hexes, as shown in the
imagine where their characters are in relation to Creature Size and Space table and the accompany-
their surroundings and their enemies. Certain com- ing diagrams.
bat encounters, however, can benefit from having If the miniature you use for a monster takes up an
visual aids or physical props, the most common amount of space different from what's in the table,
of which are miniatures and a battle grid. Minia- that's fine, but treat the monster as its official size
tures are typically used in conjunction with model for all rules. For example, you might use a miniature
terrain, modular dungeon tiles, or maps drawn on that has a Large base to represent a Huge giant.
large vinyl mats. Most virtual tabletops for on- ‘That giant takes up less space on the battlefield than
line play simulate miniatures and grids in a digital size suggests, but itis still Huge for the purposes
environment. of rules like grappling.
‘The following sections expand on the rules in the
Player's Handbook for depicting combat using minia- CREATURE SIZE AND SPACE
ture figures on a grid.
Size Space in Squares Space in Hexes,
TacticaL Maps Tiny 4 per square 4 per hex
You can draw tactical maps with colored markers Small 1 square Thex
on an erasable vinyl mat with L-inch squares or a
similar flat surface. Preprinted poster-sized maps, Medium ‘1 square hex
‘maps assembled from cardboard tiles, and terrain Large 4 squares (2by 2) 3 hexes
made of sculpted plaster or resin are other options. Huge 9 squares (3 by3) 7 hexes
If you're playing on a virtual tabletop, you can find
Gargantuan 16 squares (4 by 4) 12 hexes or
abundant tactical maps in digital form online.
The most common unit for tactical maps is the or more more

5-foot square, and maps with grids are readily avail-
able and easy to create. However, you don't have AREAS OF EFFECT
to use a grid at all. You can track distances with a An area of effect must be translated onto squares
tape measure, string, rulers, or pipe cleaners cut to or hexes to determine which potential targets are in
specific lengths. Another option is a play surface the area. If the area has a point of origin, choose an
covered by t-inch hexagons (often called hexes), intersection of squares or hexes to be the point of
which makes movement more flexible while keeping origin, then follow its rules as normal. If an area of
the easy counting of a grid. Dungeon corridors with effect covers at least halfa square or hex, the entire
straight walls and right angles don't map easily onto square or hex is affected.
hexes, though.

CREATURE SIZE ON SQUARES AND HEXES

Tw ‘Swat on Meoiun Lance Huse Gaacanruan,

a.

2 | RUNNIN
CHAPTER G
THE GAME

Have Coven

Cover ON
SQUARES AND
Hexes

Line oF SIGHT If you want more accuracy, use the following rule:
To determine whether there is line of sight between the first diagonal square counts as 5 feet, but the
two spaces, pick a corner of one space and trace second diagonal square counts as 10 feet. This pat-
an imaginary line from that corner to any part of tern of 5 feet and then 10 feet continues whenever
another space. If you can trace a line that doesn't you're counting diagonally, even if the creature
pass through or touch an object or effect that blocks moves straight between different bits of diagonal
vision—such as a stone wall, a thick curtain, or a movement. For example, a character might move 1
dense cloud of fog—then there is line of sight. square diagonally (5 feet), then 3 squares straight
(15 feet), and then another square diagonally (10
Cover feet) for a total movement of 30 feet.
‘The accompanying diagrams illustrate cover on
squares or hexes. To determine whether a target TRACKING PosiTION AT LONG RANGE
has cover against an attack or other effect, choose If combat erupts between two groups that are hun-
a corner of the attacker's space or the point of ori- dreds of feet away from each other, try the follow-
gin of an area of effect. Then trace imaginary lines ing techniques to keep track of who's where:
from that corner to every corner of any one square
the target occupies. If one or two ofthose lines are Note Paper. List all combatants on a piece of pa-

blocked by an obstacle (includinga creature), the per, and keep a running tally of each creature's
target has Half Cover. If three or four of those lines distance from the party's starting point (the
are blocked but the attack or effect can still reach party starts at 0 feet). As the characters advance,
the target (such as when the target is behind an ar- increase their numbers; as the monsters advance
row lit), the target has Three-Quarters Cover. toward the characters, decrease their numbers.

On hexes, use the same procedure as above, draw- Adjust the Grid Scale. If you're using a battle grid,
ing lines between the corners ofthe hexagons. The take a section ofthat grid and use it to track posi-
target has Half Cover if one, two, or three lines are tion, changing the scale so that each square is 30

blocked by an obstacle, and Three-Quarters Cover feet. You don’t need to be precise about creatures’
if four or more lines are blocked but the attack or positions, just their distance from each other.
effect can still reach the target. Dice as Range Counters. Do away with the grid
and put miniatures in their relative positions, us~
D1AGONAL MOVEMENT ing dice next to each miniature to show how far
‘The Player's Handbook presents a simple method for they've traveled. You can use percentile dice (or
counting movement and measuring range on a grid three di0s, with each die representing a digit in
of squares: count every square as 5 feet, even if the a three-digit number, if the encounter begins at a
creature is moving or counting diagonally. While range between 100 and 1,000 feet), or use one or
fast in play, this rule breaks the laws of geometry. more 420s to show how many 5-foot or 10-foot
squares the creature has advanced.

CHAPTER 2| RUNNING THEGAME 45,

NARRATION IN COMBAT Descrisinc ACTIONS
Action Description
Although it’s important that the players understand
what's going on in terms of the rules, the game can Dash “Dispensing with attacks, your foe hur-
get dull if everyone uses only “gamespeak": “That's ries across the room.”
an 18 to hit,” “You hit; now roll damage,” “I1 points,” Disengage “Careful not to drop its guard, your foe
and “OK, now we're to Initiative count 13." Instead, ‘edges away from you.”
use the rules and your knowledge of the scene to
Dodge “Your foe watches you closely and tries,
help your narration. If 18 is barely a hit, but the 11
to parry your attacks.”
points of damage is a bad wound for the enemy,
say: “You swing wildly, and the knight brings his, Help “While its ally attacks, your foe darts
shield up just a second too late. Your blade catches around, causing a distraction.”
him along the jaw, drawing a deep gash. He recoils, Magic “Your foe gestures in a deliberate man-
bleeding badly! ner and utters an invocation.”
As the characters fight monsters, you can reveal
Ready “Your foe seems to be waiting for
formation to help the players make good choices,
as described in the sections that follow. something, ready to act.”

Loss or Hir Points You can combine those narrative descriptions with
You can give players a sense of how well they're game rules: “Dispensing with attacks, your foe hur-
doing against a creature by describing, in narrative ries across the room, taking the Dash action.”
terms, how hurt the creature is. For example, if the MonsTERs CasTING SPELLS
creature is Bloodied, you might say the creature has
It's important that players can tell when their
visible wounds and appears beaten down. Such in-
characters’ opponents are casting spells, giving the
formation gives the players a sense of progress and characters the opportunity to cast Counterspell or
might spur them to press the attack. On the other
otherwise interfere with the spellcasting.
hand, if the characters aren't damaging the creature
When a monster casts a spell, check the compo-
much, let the players know the creature doesn't look
nents it’s using and describe its activity appropri-
hurt. That might encourage the players to change
ately. If the spell has Verbal components, the mon-
their plan,
ster might chant, boldly proclaim, or hiss the mystic
ABILITIES, STRENGTHS, AND WEAKNESSES syllables of the spell. Somatic components involve
the monster moving its hands (or similar append-
‘Share information with the players about the char-
ages) in graceful patterns, shaping them into angu-
acteristics of creatures they fight as those charac-
teristics become apparent. For example, if a Wizard lar positions, or thrusting them sharply forward.
a Spellcasting
Finally, the monster might be holding
casts Fire Bolt against a Fire Elemental (a creature
Focus or some other Material component.
that has Immunity to Fire damage), let the players
know the spell doesn't seem to bother the creature
AWARDING HEROIC INSPIRATION
at all, Players might correctly guess that a creature
made offire probably wouldn't harmed by Fire Bolt; As discussed in the Player's Handbook, Heroic
feel free to confirm their guesses. Inspiration is a reward you can give to characters
when their players make the game more fun, ex:
ACTIONS IN COMBAT ing, and memorable for everyone at the table.
When a monster takes an action in combat, the ‘Any player who makes the whole table erupt in
players need to have some idea what's going on both laughter, cheers, or howls ofsurprise probably
in the fictional reality of the game and in terms of deserves Heroic Inspiration.
the rules of the game. This means that when an You can also use Heroic Inspiration to reward
enemy with a Crossbow takes the Ready action to roleplaying, immersion in the game, and heroism.
cover the area in front of a door, the players should Use it to incentivize the kind of behavior you want
have a pretty good idea that if their characters to see in your game, such as acting in character,
move in front of that door, the enemy will shoot taking risks, thinking strategically, cooperating
them. A monster's description in the Monster Manual, well, or embracing the tropes of a particular
often explains what's happening in the world while genre. Make sure your use of Heroic Inspiration
the monster is using its special actions. The Describ- is aligned with the expectations you set out at the
ing Actions table has descriptions you can use to start of your game (see “Ensuring Fun for All” in
explain what's going on when a creature takes one chapter 1).
of the common actions available to all creatures. Ee
Nee

46 CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

7)

Vobe

Some monsters have the special ability to ignor HASTEN A Monster's DEMISE
some or all ofa spell’s normal components, which Ifa combat has gone on long enough and the char-
might prevent characters from recognizing what acters' victory is almost certain, you can simply
the monster is doing: Similarly, when monsters use have the monster drop dead. The players don't ever
magical abilities that don’t involve casting spells, need to know that it still had 15 Hit Points left after
make sure it's clear to the players that the monster the characters’ last attack.
is drawing on its unique magical abilities, not cast-
ing a spell their characters could counter. Ep Hostiuities
Most monsters can see when a fight’s not going
KEEPING COMBAT MOVING their way (or not going anywhere at all). A sapient

‘Sometimes even the best-planned combat encoun- monster might parley with the characters in an
ter can turn into a slog, where no one’s moving and effort to get out ofthe situation alive. Suddenly a
neither side is hitting or dealing much damage to combat encounter turns into a social interaction

the other. When that happens, here are a few tech- as the monster and characters negotiate an end to

niques
you can use to get things moving again or their hostilities. A nonsapient monster might play

bring the encounter to a speedy close. dead to try to get the characters to stop attacking it,
only to get up and run away as soon as it has the op-
Don’t REPEAT GAME STATES portunity. See “Fight or Flight” later in this chapter
When characters do something to change the tacti- for more suggestions.
cal situation, don't respond by putting things back
to the way they were before. For example, if a char-
App A COMBATANT
acter takes the Disengage action to move away from To add excitement to a battle, consider adding a

a group of monsters, don't respond by having those combatant. Maybe a monstrous predator wanders

same monsters chase the character. Move the mon- onto the scene where the characters are locked

sters somewhere else. battle with another foe. Or maybe the noise of the
ongoing combat attracts the attention of nearby

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME

dungeon denizens. The new combatant might at- or lower if you like, On a failed save, the creature
tack both the characters and their foes, or it might either flees or tries to parley with the enemy (see
join one side or the other. Each time one or more “Avoiding or Ending a Fight" below). On a success-
new combatants join the encounter, roll Initiative ful save, the creature is willing to fight. When deal-
for them and weave them into the Initiative order. ing with a group of creatures, the leader makes this,
saving throw on behalf
of the group.
CHANGE THE TERRAIN When creatures that are already engaged in battle
Consider changing a battle’s terrain to introduce a realize they're likely to lose, they usually try to exit
new element and give combatants reasons to move that battle. A monster is likely to flee if either of the
around. Perhaps a powerful attack or an explosive following is true:
spell topples a column, shatters a wall, or breaks up
the floor, Maybe a fissure opens in the floor, releas- + The monster starts its turn Bloodied and more
ing noxious vapors, obscuring smoke, or lava. Magic than half its allies are dead or have the Incapaci-

could tear open the boundaries between planes of tated condition, while no one is dead or Incapaci-
existence, unleashing raw elements or other planar tated on the other side.

energy. Or perhaps a monster's desperation causes its turn Bloodied and has the
wild magic to warp the fabric ofreality. You can
use the environmental effects, hazards, and traps in, In those circumstances, you can decide the monster
chapter 3 to represent these effects. flees, or you can have it make a DC 10 Wisdom sav-
ing throw and flee or parley on a failed save. In gen-
CHANGE THE MONSTER
eral, ifit is obvious to you that a creature is going to
You can transform one monster into another to
lose, assume it’s obvious to that creature as well,
keep a fight interesting. Maybe a worg splits open,
and a gibbering mouther spills out to take its place. AVOIDING OR ENDING A FIGHT
Ora cultist is consumed in a pillar of infernal flame, ‘A creature that wishes to end or avoid a fight has
and a devil erupts from the ashes. You can also alter two options:
a monster's stat block in subtle ways in the middle
of combat; for example, you might decide that a Flight. The creature can retreat or run away on its
monster flies into a frenzy when it’s Bloodied, giv- turn, Select a destination for the fleeing party,
such as a known place of safety (perhaps a room
ing it Advantage on its attack rolls—and giving the
with a door that can be closed and barred). If the
characters Advantage on their attack rolls against it
opponents pursue, you can use the “Chases” sec-
as well, speeding the fight to an end.
tion in chapter 3 to help adjudicate what happens.
ADJUSTING DIFFICULTY Parley. A parley is an attempt to settle a conflict
nonviolently. The side that wishes to end or avoid
Many of the same techniques that help keep com-
combat offers to surrender or proposes some sort
bat moving can also be useful in situations where
of exchange. If one side wants to parley in the
a combat encounter is either harder or easier than
middle of combat and the other side agrees, you
you anticipated and you want to adjust it. Monsters
can suspend the Initiative order for some interac
might initiate negotiations when they're winning,
tion. If the two sides don’t come to an agreement,
allowing overmatched characters a chance to sur-
pick up the Initiative order where it left off.
render or retreat. One of the monsters might switch
sides and help the characters defeat its kin (for
noble or selfish reasons). A change of terrain can CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT
provide characters a chance to escape or give over Experience Points (XP) fuel level advancement for
matched monsters an edge. player characters and are most often the reward for
completing combat encounters.
FIGHT OR FLIGHT
AWARDING XP
Few creatures fight to the death, Nearly all crea
tures have survival instincts that cause them to Each monster has an XP value based on its Chal-
reevaluate their tactics in the face of their own lenge Rating. When adventurers overcome one or
destruction. Sapient creatures confronted by more monsters—typically by killing, routing, cap-

obviously more numerous or powerful opponents turing, or cleverly avoiding them-they divide the
usually try to avoid battle. But brave, desperate, or total XP value of the monsters evenly among them-
devoted creatures might never retreat from a battle. selves. Ifthe party received substantial assistance
If you can’t decide whether
a creature is willing from one or more NPCs, count those NPCs as party
to fight, have it make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw members when dividing up the XP, since the NPCs
before Initiative is rolled. You can set the DC higher made the challenge easier. (See also “Nonplayer
Characters” in chapter
3.)

CHAPTER
2 | RUNNING THE GAME

NONCOMBAT CHALLENGES VARIANT: TRAINING TO GAIN LEVELS
You decide whether to award XP to characters Asa variant rule, you can require characters to
for overcoming challenges outside combat. If the spend time between adventures training or study-
adventurers complete a tense negotiation with a ing before they gain the benefits of a new level. This
baron, forge a trade agreement with a guild of surly variant slows the passage of time in the game world,
smiths, or safely navigate the Chasm of Doom, you which can help support a more realistic or gritty
might decide the characters deserve XP. tone in your campaign.
‘Asa starting point, use the rules for building If you choose this option, after earning enough
combat encounters in chapter 4 to gauge the diffi Experience Points to attain a new level, a character
culty of the challenge. Then award the characters must train for a number of days before gaining any
XP as if it had been a combat encounter ofthe same class features associated with the new level. You
difficulty. can decide whether the character can train inde-
pendently or requires a trainer.
MILESTONES ‘The training time required depends on the level to
You can also award XP when characters complete be gained, as shown on the Training to Gain Levels,
significant milestones. When preparing your adven- table. The training cost is for the total training time.
ture, designate certain events or challenges as mile-
stones, as with the following examples: TRAINING TO GAIN LEVELS
+ Accomplishing one in a series of goals necessary Level Attained Training Time Training Cost
to complete the adventure. 4 10 days 20GP
+ Discovering a hidden location or piece of informa-
510 20 days 40.GP
tion relevant to the adventure.
+ Reaching an important destination. m6 30 days 60.GP
17-20 40 days 80GP
When awarding XP, treat a major milestone as a
high-difficulty encounter and a minor milestone as a
LEVEL ADVANCEMENT WITHOUT XP
low-difficulty encounter.
Other Milestone Rewards. If you want to reward You can do away with XP entirely and advance
your players for their progress through an adven- characters based on how many sessions they play
ture with something more than XP and treasure, or when the characters accomplish significant story
also give them small rewards at milestone points, goals. This method of level advancement can be par-
such as the following: ticularly helpful if your campaign doesn't include
much combat or includes so much combat that
- The adventurers gain the benefit of a Short Rest.
tracking XP becomes tiresome.
+ Characters recover a Hit Point Die or a level 1
spell slot. SESSION-BASED ADVANCEMENT.
+ Characters regain the use of magic items that A good rate ofsession-based advancement is to have
have had their limited uses expended. characters reach level 2 after the first session of
play, level 3 after another session, and level 4 after
LEVELING UP two more sessions. Then spend two or three ses-
Some DMs let characters gain the benefits of a new sions for each subsequent level. Above level 10, you
level as soon as the characters have the required can speed the rate of advancement so the characters
XP, which gives the players the joy of using the new gain anew level every one or two sessions. This
features and spells they gain immediately. Other assumes your sessions are about four hours long
DMs prefer to wait until the characters take a Long and include encounters of varying difficulty, ending
Rest or until the end ofa session before letting char- with a significant milestone as described above. You
acters level up, which keeps the adventure flowing ‘can adjust the rate if you prefer significantly shorter
smoothly and lets players pore over their new op- or longer sessions and to account for how much
tions during a lull in the action or between sessions. your group accomplishes in a typical session.
Do what works best for your group.
Ifa character levels up outside a Long Rest, the Story-BASED ADVANCEMENT
character’s current Hit Points and Hit Point max- Rather than having characters gain a level after a
imum both increase by the appropriate number certain number of sessions, you can instead tie their
for the new level, and the character gains access to advancement to accomplishing particular goals in
additional abilities and spell slots (if appropriate) the campaign, When the characters achieve those
without regaining any that are already expended. goals, they level up. Try to plan significant cam-
paign goals so the characters gain levels at about
the same rate as for session-based advancement.

CHAPTER 2 | RUNNING THE GAME, 49,

CHAPTER 3

DM’s TOOLBOX
W essentials of beinga Dungeon Master,
HEREAS CHAPTERS | AND 2. TEACH THE When good- and evil-aligned adventurers coexist
in the same party, they're likely to have disagre
this chapter provides advice on topics ments as the campaign unfolds. Many players enjoy
that can surface as you prepare or run a D&D game roleplaying such conflicts, but see “Ensuring Fun
session, as well as rules for adventure elements for All” in chapter 1 if you run into trouble with evil
ranging from chases and doors to traps. It also in- characters played in a disruptive way.
cludes guidance on creating new backgrounds, crea-
PLANES AND ALIGNMENT
tures, magic items, and spells to amuse your players.
‘The Outer Planes (described in chapter 6) are
ALIGNMENT realms where alignment manifests in reality. When
creatures explore the Outer Planes, they can expe
‘As described in the Player’s Handbook, alignment
rience those realms differently depending on their
is a roleplaying tool. It is a quick way to describe a
alignment.
creature's moral and ethical orientation. Like other
elements of the game, it's meant to be a tool to serve MONSTER ALIGNMENT
you and your game, not a constraint or burden.
Alignment can help you determine how a creature
Alignment can help your game in three ways: as a
behaves in your game in two simple ways.
tool for player characters, as a descriptor ofa crea-
ture’s demeanor, and as a summary of an organiza- STARTING ATTITUDE
tion's ethos. Accreature’s alignment can help you determine the
creature's attitude in an encounter. A Chaotic Evil
CHARACTER ALIGNMENT
monster is likely to be Hostile, while a Lawful Good
Some common misconceptions about alignment one is more likely to have a Friendly attitude, ready
can cause conflicts between players and DMs. The to help those in need.
following sections can help you navigate how player
characters interact with alignment. PERSONALITY
Chapter 2 of the Player's Handbook offers a table of
Actions INDICATE ALIGNMENT brief personality traits linked to alignment that can
‘A character might think they're good and profess to inspire you in playing an NPC or another monster
believe that senseless slaughter is wrong, but if that in your game.
character repeatedly engages in senseless slaughter,
the character's beliefs aren't what they profess. ORGANIZATION ETHOS
Alignment doesn't limit the actions characters Tt can be useful to assign an alignment to an organi-
can take; rather, the actions they take indicate what cluding a faction, a guild, or a nation—to
their alignment is. It's OK to stray from the tenets of its ethos. This can help you decide how
one’s alignment now and then, and players can (and groups interact with each other.
should) change their characters’ alignments if these An organization's ethos doesn't dictate the align-
alignments no longer describe their characters. ment of its members or even the alignment of its
leaders. In fact, a stark difference between a soci-
Goop anp Evit CaN Cooperate
ety’s ethos and the alignment of its leadership can
Good and evil characters can share common goals,
generate interesting material for adventure. For ex-
though they'll likely use different tactics to pursue
ample, imagine a Neutral Good queen ascending to
those goals.
the throne ofa Lawful Evil empire and struggling
Imagine two characters—one Lawful Good, the
to reform its institutions.
other Lawful Evil—who are both dedicated to stop-
ping monsters from preying on the people of their
city. The Lawful Evil character is willing to employ
methods (such as bribing or threatening potential
witnesses) that the Lawful Good character isn't.

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX

\

CHASES RUNNING THE CHASE
The rules for movement in combat don't translate to Participants in the chase are strongly motivated to
every situation. In particular, they can take the Dash action every round. Pursuers who
make
a po-
tentially thrill e seem dull and predictable. stop to cast spells and make attacks run the risk
of
Faster creatures always catch up to slower ones, losing their quarry, and a quarry that doesn't take
ile creatures with the same Speed never close the Dash action is likely to be caught.
the distance between each other. Use the follow-
ing rules to introduce random elements that make DasHinc
chases more exciting. A chase participant can take the Dash action a num-
Know the capabilities of the characters in your ber of times equal to 3 plus its Constitution modifier
party before you make a chase an important feature (minimum of once). Each additional Dash action
of
an adventure. A character with a high Speed or t takes during the chase requires the creature
to
the right spell (such as Dimension Door, Fly, or Hold uucceed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw at
Monster) can often end a chase before it begins. the end of its turn or gain 1 Exhaustion level. A
participant drops out of the chase if its Speed is 0.
BEGINNING A CHASE
SPELLS AND ATTACKS
Acchase requires at least one quarry and at least one
A chase participant can make attacks and cast spells
pursuer. Any participants not already in Initiative
against other creatures within range.
order must roll Initiative as the chase begins. As in
Chase participants can't normally make Opp.
combat, each participant in the chase can take one
tunity Attacks against each other, since they are all
action and move on its turn.
assumed to be moving in the same dire
‘When a chase begins, determine the starting ction at the
same time. However, participants can
distance between the quarry and the pursuers. still be the
targets of Opportunity Attacks from creatures not
‘Track the distance between them, and designate the
participating in the chase. For example, adventurer
pursuer closest to the quarry s
as the lead. The lead
who chase a thief past a gang ofruffians might pro-
pursuer might change from round to round.
voke Opportunity Attacks from the ruff
ians.

CHAPTE
3 | R
DM's TOOLBOX

ENDING A CHASE evade the thieves pursuing them. Roll Initiative for
the new arrivals, and run both chases simultane-
A chase ends when one side or the other stops,
ously. Alternatively, the fleeing thief might run into
when each quarry escapes, or when the pursuers
his accomplices. The outnumbered characters might
are close enough to their quarry to catch it.
then flee with the thieves in pursuit.
If neither side gives up the chase, the quarry
makes a Dexterity (Stealth) check on Initiative MAPPING THE CHASE
count 0 each round, after every participant in the
When you plan a chase, draw a rough map that
chase has taken its turn. If the quarry is never out
shows the route. Insert obstacles and complications
of the lead pursuer’s sight, the check fails automat-
ically. Otherwise, compare the check’s total to the at specific points, especially ones that require the
characters to make ability checks or saving throws
Passive Perception scores ofthe pursuers. If the
to avoid slowing or stopping, or use the random ta-
quarry consists of multiple creatures, they all make
bles of complications in the “Chase Complications”
the check separately, so it’s possible for one quarry
section to choose obstacles that occur at specific
to escape while others remain in the chase.
points.
The quarry can gain Advantage or Disadvantage
on its check based on the circumstances, as shown Complications can be barriers to progress or op-
in the Escape Factors table.
portunities for mayhem. Characters being chased
through a forest by bugbears might spot a wasp nest
Escape Factors and slow down long enough to attack the nest or
throw rocks at it to enrage the wasps within, thus
Factor Check Has ...
creating an obstacle for their pursuers.
Many things to hide behind Advantage Amap of
a chase can be linear or have many
A very crowded area Advantage branches, depending on the nature of the chase. For

Few things to hide behind Disadvantage
example, a mine cart chase might have few (if any)
branches, while a sewer chase might have several.
‘An uncrowded area Disadvantage

CHASE COMPLICATIONS
Other factors might help or hinder the quarry's
ability to escape, at your discretion. For example, a Unexpected complications make a chase more excit-
quarry with a Faerie Fire spell cast on it might have ing. The accompanying Urban Chase Complications
Disadvantage on checks made to escape because it’s table and Wilderness Chase Complications table
much easier to spot. provide several examples. Each participant in the
If the total of the quarry’s check is greater than chase rolls 1d12 at the end of its turn. Consult the
the highest Passive Perception score of the pursu- appropriate table to determine whether a complica-
ers, the quarry escapes. If not, the chase continues tion occurs. If it does, it affects the next chase par-
for another round. Escape doesn't necessarily mean ticipant in the Initiative order, not the participant
the quarry has outpaced its pursuers. For example, who rolled the die.
ina city, escape might mean the quarry ducked into Characters can create their own complications
2 crowd or slipped around a corner, leaving no clue to shake off pursuers or slow their quarry (for ex-
2s to where it went. ample, casting the Web spell in a narrow alleyway).
Adjudicate these at your discretion.
SPLITTING UP
DESIGNING YOUR OWN CHASE TABLES
Creatures being chased can split up into smaller
Unusual environments might suggest unique chase
roups. This tactic forces pursuers to either divide
tables, A chase through the sewers of the Free City
‘their forces or allow some of the quarry to escape.
of Greyhawk or through the spiderweb-filled alleys
2 pursuit splits into several smaller chases, re-
of Menzoberranzan (a subterranean city teeming
solve each chase separately. You can keep all the
with spiders and worshipers of Lolth) might inspire
creatures in Initiative order, but track the distances
you to create your own tables.
separately for each group.

ROLE REVERSAL
During a chase, it's possible for the pursuers to be-
come the quarry. For example, characters chasinga
sSief through a marketplace might draw unwanted
attention from other members ofthe thieves’ guild.
As they pursue the fleeing thief, they must also

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX 53

URBAN CHASE COMPLICATIONS WILDERNESS CHASE COMPLICATIONS

1d12 Complication 1d12_ Complication

1 A cart or another large obstacle blocks your 1 You pass through a Swarm of Insects (see
way. Makea DC 10 Dexterity saving throw the Monster Manual, with the DM choosing
to get past the obstacle. On a failed save, whichever kind of insects makes the most
the obstacle counts as 10 feet of Difficult sense). The swarm uses one ofits actions,
Terrain for you. targeting you.

crowd blocks your way. Make a DC 10 A stream or ravine blocks your path. Make

Strength, Dexterity, or Charisma saving a DC 10 Strength or Dexterity saving throw
throw (your choice) to navigate through the (your choice) to cross the impediment. On a
crowd. Ona failed save, the crowd counts failed save, the impediment counts as 10 feet
a 10 feet of Difficult Terrain for you, of Difficult Terrain for you,

A maze of barrels, crates, or similar ob- Make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On
stacles stands in your way. Make a DC 10 a failed save, blowing sand, dirt, ash, snow, or
Dexterity or Intelligence saving throw (your pollen causes you to have the Blinded condi-
choice) to navigate the maze. On a failed tion until the end of your turn. While you are
save, the maze counts as 10 feet of Difficult Blinded in this way, your Speed is halved
Terrain for you. A sudden drop catches you by surprise. Make
The ground is slippery with rain, spilled oil, a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw to navigate

‘or some other liquid. Make a DC 10 Dexter- the impediment. On a failed save, you fall
ity saving throw. On a failed save, you have 10 feet.
the Prone condition. Your path takes you near a patch of razorvine
You encounter a brawl in progress. Make (see “Hazards” in this chapter). Make a DC 15
a DC 15 Strength, Dexterity, or Charisma Dexterity saving throw or use 10 feet of move-
saving throw (your choice) to get past the ment (your choice) to avoid the razorvine. On
brawlers unimpeded. On a failed save, you a failed save, you take 1d10 Slashing damage.
take 2d4 Bludgeoning damage, and the A creature native to the area notices you. (The
brawlers count as 10 feet of Difficult Terrain DM chooses a creature appropriate for the
for you. terrain.) Make a DC 10 Wisdom or Charisma
You must make a sharp turn to avoid col- saving throw (your choice). On a failed save,

liding with something impassable. Make a the creature joins the chase, with you as its
DC 10 Dexterity saving throw to navigate quarry.

the turn. On a failed save, you collide with 7-12 There is no complication
something hard and take 1d4 Bludgeoning

damage

7A2_ There is no complication.
EAL KANATHAR'S DET GOLOFISH

54 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

You micver aurea THe SaiLon

sens or Gaevinwn,

CREATING A BACKGROUND Charisma.
This ability is ideal fora background
that involves performance or social interaction.
A character's background represents what the char-
acter did prior to becoming an adventurer. Creating 2: CHOOSE A FEAT _
ie background or customizing an existing
Choose one feat from the Origin category. See the
one from the Player’s Handbook can reflect the par-
Player's Handbook for examples of Origin feats.
ticular theme of your campaign or elements of your
world. You can also create a background to help a CHOOSE SKILL PROFICIENCIES
player craft the story they have in mind for their
Choose two skills appropriate for the background.
character.
There needn't be a relationship between the skill
This section describes, step by step, how you can
proficiencies a background grants and the abil
create backgrounds like the ones in the Player's
scores it increase:
Handbook, tailored for your world and the heroes
init.
4: CHOOSE A TOOLPROFICIENCY
1: CHOOSE ABILITIES
_ Choose one tool used in the practice of the back-
ground or often associated with it.
Choose three abilities that seem appropriate for the
background:
CHOOSE EQUIPMENT
Strength or Dexterity. These abilities are ideal for semble a package of equipment worth 50 GP (in-
a background involving physical exertion. cluding unspent gold). Don't include Martial weap-
Constitution. This ability is ideal for a background ons or armor, as characters get them from their
that involves endurance or long hours of activity. class choices.
Intelligence or Wisdom. One or both abilities are
ideal for a background that focuses on cerebral or
spiritual matters.

CHAPTER 3|DM'S TOOLBOX 55

Bawa YAoA INVENTS A NEW

ade

CREATING A CREATURE Armor Class, or Hit Points, which in turn can alter
its Challenge Rating.
Use the approaches and examples in the following
sections to build custom creatu
for your
resgame. LANGUAGES
You can change any or al of the languages the
MINOR ALTERATIONS
creature knows. You might want to add languages
You can change the superficial details of a creature's if you've made a creature sapient that wasn't be-
appearance however you like, and you can alter fore. You can also add or remove telepathy
or other
any of the followin
pieces
g of a monster's stat block forms of communication.
without impacting its functionality.
PROFICIENCIES
Size AND CREATURE TyPE You can give
a creature any skill proficiencies you
You can alter a creature
size and
's creature type as want and give it Expertise if you want it to be very
you please. For example, you can use an Ogre stat skilled. If you want a creature to be good at hi
block fora human bully—just make it a Medium Hu- ing, give it Expertise in the Stealth skill. If its keen
manoid instead ofa Large senses make it an excellent tracker or otherwise
adept at finding hidden foes, give it Expertise in the
ABILITY SCORES
Perception skill. (You can also increase its Wisdom,
You can usually change a creature's Intelligence,
as noted above.)
Wisdom, and Charisma scores freely unless the
You can also swap a monst saving throw profi-
ability is used for spellcasting. For example, a Black
ciencies. If it has none, you can add one or tw
Pudding stat block could represent a sapient alien
if you raise its Intelligence and Charisma to 10 or SEN
80, It's usually best to leave its Strength, Dexterity, Blindsight, Darkvision, Tremorsense, and Truesight
and Constitution scores alone, as changes to these have no bearing on a creature's Challenge Rating,
scores can alter a monster's attack bonus, damage, You can add or remove them freely.

CHAPTER 3 | DM’s TOOLBC

SPELLS Fey Ancestry. The creature has Advantage on saving
Ifa stat block has spells, you can replace any ofits throws it makes to avoid orend the Charmed condition,
spells with a different spell of the same level. Avoid and magic can’t put it to sleep.
replacing a spell that deals damage with one that
Forbiddance. The creature can't enter a residence with-
doesn't and vice versa.
out an invitation from one of its occupants.

ATTACKS Gloom Shroud. imperceptible energy channeled from
You can freely change the name and flavor of an the Shadowfell extends from the creature in a 20-foot
attack, as well as its damage type. For example, you Emanation. Other creatures in that area have Disadvan-
can turn an ordinary Skeleton into an ice skeleton tage on Charisma checks and Charisma saving throws.
that deals Cold damage as it accosts characters with
Light. The creature sheds Bright Light in a 10-foot
ablade of ice or hurls shards of ice at them.
radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. As a
Bonus Action, the creature can suppress this light
RESISTANCES AND IMMUNITIES
or cause it to return. The light winks out if the crea-
Ifa creature doesn't have Resistance or Immunity
ture dies.
to one or more damage types, you can give it Re-
sistance or Immunity to one or two damage types. Mimicry. The creature can mimic Beast sounds and
You can also change the damage type of its existing Humanoid voices. A creature that hears the sounds can
Resistances and Immunities. tell they are imitations with a successful DC 14 Wisdom
(Insight) check,
TRAITS
Poison Tolerant. The creature has Advantage on saving
You can add traits to a creature's stat block to com- throws it makes to avoid or end the Poisoned condition,
municate aspects of the creature's nature. See the
Resonant Connection. The creature has a supernatural
Creature Traits list for sample traits.
connection to another creature or an object and knows
You can also use traits from other stat blocks in
the most direct route to it, provided the two are within
the Monster Manual, provided you don't add traits
T mile of each other.
that alter a creature's Hit Points, confer Temporary
Hit Points, or change the amount of damage the ‘Siege Monster. The creature deals double damage to
creature deals to other creatures. objects and structures
Slaad Host. When the creature dies, a Hostile Slaad
CREATURE TRAITS
Tadpole bursts from its innards in the same space.
‘Aversion to Fire. ifthe creature takes Fire damage, it
Steadfast. The creature has Immunity to the Frightened
has Disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks un-
condition while it can see an ally within 30 feet of itself.
til the end of its next turn
Telepathic Bond. The creature is linked psychically to
Battle Ready. The creature has Advantage on Initia-
another creature. While both are on the same plane of
tive rolls.
existence, they can communicate telepathically with
Beast Whisperer. The creature can communicate with each other.
Beasts as if they shared a common language.
Telepathic Shroud. The creature is immune to any effect
Death jinx. When the creature dies, one random crea- that would sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as,
ture within 10 feet of the dead creature is targeted by a well as to spells from the school of Divination. As a
Bane spell (save DC 13), which lasts for its full duration, Bonus Action, the creature can suppress this trait or
reactivate it.
Dimensional Disruption. Disruptive energy extends
from the creature in a 30-foot Emanation. Other crea- Ventriloquism. Whenever the creature speaks, it can
tures can't teleport to or from a space in that area. Any choose a point within 30 feet ofitself; its voice ema-
attempt to do so is wasted, nates from that point,
Disciple ofthe Nine Hells. When the creature dies, its Warrior's Wrath. The creature has Advantage on melee
body disgorges a Hostile Imp in the same space. attack rolls against any Bloodied creature,

Disintegration. When the creature dies, its body and Wild Talent. Choose one cantrip; the creature can cast
nonmagical possessions turn to dust. Any magic items that cantrip without spell components, using Intell
it possessed are left behind in its space. gence, Wisdom, or Charisma as the spelicasting ability.
Emissary ofJuiblex. When the creature dies, its body
disgorges a Hostile Ochre Jelly in the same space.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX
57

CREATING A Macic ITEM however, gives a character the ability to deal Force
damage.
‘The magic items in chapter 7 are but a few of the
The simpler your approach, the easier it is for a
magic treasures that characters can discover during
character to use the item in play. Giving the item
their adventures. You can modify these magic items
charges is fine, especially if it has several different
or create new ones using the guidelines in this,
abilities, but simply deciding that an item is always
section.
active or can be used a fixed number of times per
Rules for characters crafting magic items are in
day might be easier to manage.
chapter 7.
Power LEVEL
MopiFYING A Macic ITEM If you make an item that lets a character kill what-
You can create a new magic item by tweaking one ever they hit with it, that item will likely unbalance
or more existing ones. Suggestions are provided in your game. On the other hand, an item whose bene-
the sections that follow fit rarely comes into play isn't much of a reward.
Use the Magic Item Power by Rarity table as a
ALTERED CAPABILITIES guide to help you determine how powerful a magic
One capability can replace a similar one. For ex- item should be based on its rarity.
ample, a Potion of Climbing could become a Potion of
‘Swimming. Macic Item Power By RARITY

ALTERED FoRM Rarity Max. Spell Level Max. Bonus
‘You can alter a magic item's form while leaving its Common 1 =
properties intact. For example, you can turn a Ring Uncommon 3 +
of the Ram into a wand or a Cloak of Protection
some other worn object (such as a circlet) without
into
Rare 5 2
altering the item's properties. Very Rare 8 8B

Legendary 9 +4
ALTERED DAMAGE TYPES
An item that deals damage of one type could instead Maximum Spell Level. This column of the table in-
deal damage of another type. For example, a Flame dicates the highest-level spell effect the item should
Tongue sword could deal Lightning damage instead confer, in the form ofa once-per-day or similarly
of Fire damage. limited property. For example, a Common magic
item might confer the benefit of a level I spell once
ComBininc ITeMs per day (or just once if it's consumable). A Rare,
You can merge the properties of two magic items of, Very Rare, or Legendary magic item might allow its,
the same rarity into a single item, provided no more possessor to cast a lower-level spell more frequently.
than one of them requires Attunement. For exam- ‘Maximum Bonus. If an item delivers a static bonus
ple, you could combine the properties of a Helm of to AC, attack rolls, saving throws, or ability checks,
Comprehending Languages with those of a Helm of this column suggests an appropriate bonus based on
Telepathy into a single helmet. This makes th the item’s rarity.
more powerful (and probably increases its rarity),
but it won't break your game. ATTUNEMENT
Decide whether the item requires a character to be
SPECIAL FEATURES AND SENTIENCE attuned to it to use its properties. Consider the fol-
Chapter 7 has rules for giving magic items inter- lowing guidelines.
esting histories, minor properties, quirks, and Limit Sharing. If having all the characters in a
sentience. party pass an item around to gain its lasting ben-
efits would be disruptive, the item should require
CreaTinc A New ITEM Attunement.
If modifying an item doesn’t quite fulfill the need, Limit Stacking. If the item grants a bonus that
you can create one from scratch. other items also grant, it's a good idea to require
‘A magic item should either let a character do Attunement so characters don't try to collect too
something they couldn't do before or improve many of those items.
the character's ability to do something they can
do already. For example, a Ring ofJumping lets its
wearer jump greater distances, thus augmenting
what a character can already do. A Ring of the Ram,

38 CHAPTER 3 | DM'S TOOLBOX

CREATING A SPELL You can use different damage dice than the ones
in the table if the average damage is about the same.
When creating a new spell, use existing ones as ex-
For example, you could change a cantrip’s damage
amples. Here are some things to consider:
from 1410 (average 5.5) to 2d4 (average 5), reducing
Name. The spell must have a unique name. the maximum damage and making an average result
Balance. If the spell is so good that a caster would more likely.
want to use it all the time, it’s probably too power
ful for its level ‘Spevt DAMAGE
Identity. Make sure the spell fits with the identity Spell Level One Target Multiple Targets
of those who can cast it. Sorcerers and Wizards
Cantrip ido 1d6
don't typically cast healing spells, for example.
1 2d10 2d6
Spell Duration, Range, and Area. A longer dura-
tion, greater range, or larger area can make up for 2 3d10 3d6
a lesser effect, depending on the spell. 3 5410 6d6
Utility. Avoid spells that have very limited use, such
4 6d10 746
as one that works only against Oozes, Few charac-
ters will bother to learn or prepare such a spell. 5 7410 8d6

6 todio m1d6
SPELL DAMAGE_
7 dio 12d6
For any spell that deals damage, use the Spell Dam-
8 y2di0 13d6
age table to determine approximately how much
damage is appropriate given the spell's level. The ta- 9 1sd10 16d6

ble assumes the spell deals half
as much damage on
a successful saving throw ora missed attack. If your
HEALING SPELLS
spell doesn't deal damage on a successful save, you You can also use the Spell Damage table to deter-
can increase the damage by 25 percent. mine how many Hit Points a healing spell restores.
A cantrip shouldn't provide healing.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX
59

CURSES AND
MaAcIcAL CONTAGIONS
‘A curse is a magical burden that lasts for a specified
time or until it is ended by some means. A magical
contagion is an adverse effect of magical origin that
is contagious by definition.
The following sections discuss curses and magical
contagions in detail.

CursEs
A curse typically takes one of the forms detailed
below.

Brstow Curse
The simplest curses are created by the Bestow Curse
spell. The effects of such curses are limited and can
be ended by the Remove Curse spell.
Bestow Curse provides useful benchmarks for
gauging the potency of other curses. A curse that
lasts for 1 minute equates to a level 3 spell, while one
that lasts until dispelled equates to a level 9 spell.

Cursep Creatures |
Some monsters are associated with curses, whether |
as part of their origins or due to their ability to
spread curses—werewolves being a prime example.
You decide how a spell like Remove Curse affects
a creature with accursed origins. For example, you
might decide that a mummy was created through a
curse and it can be destroyed permanently only by ENVIRONMENTAL CURSES
casting Remove Curse on its corpse. Some locations are so suffused with evil that any-
one who lingers there is burdened with a curs:
Cursep Macic Irems
Demonic Possession is one example of an environ-
Cursed magic items are created deliberately or
mental curse.
originate as the result of supernatural events. Such
Demonic Possession. Demonic Possession arises
items are detailed in chapter 7.
from the chaos and evil of the Abyss and commonly
NARRATIVE CURSES besets creatures that interact with demonic objects
or linger in desecrated locations, where demonic
A curse might manifest during an adventure when
spirits await victims,
acreature’s violation ofa taboo warrants supernat-
A creature that becomes the target of Demo
ural punishment, such as breakinga vow, defiling a
Possession must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma sav-
tomb, or murderin
ang innocent. Such a curse can
ing throw or be possessed by a bodiless demonic
have any effects you design, or it might be a custom-
entity. Whenever the possessed creature rolls a 1
ized version of another type of curse discussed in
ona D20 Test, the demonic entity takes control of
this section.
the creature and determines the creature’s behav-
A creature affected by such a curse should know
ior thereafter. At the end of each of the possessed
why they're being punished and be able to learn
creature's later turns, the creature makes a DC 15
how to end their curse, likely by symbolically
Charisma saving throw, regaining control of itself
righting the wrong they committed. How a spell
ona success
like Remove Curse affects a curse that's part of your
adventure is up to you-the spell might merely sup- After finishing a Long Rest, a creature with De-
monic Possession makes a DC 15 Charisma saving
press the effects of the curse for a time. Regardless,
throw. On a successful save, the effect ends on the
narrative curses should feel like rare, potent magic
creature. A Dispel Evil and Good spell or any magic
rooted in the lore of your campaign.
that removes a curse also ends the effect on it.

60 CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX

MAGICAL CONTAGIONS
Alchemists, potion brewers, and areas of wild magic SEWER PLAGUE
are credited with creating the first magical conta- Magical Contagion
gions. An outbreak of such a contagion can form Fouled potions and alchemical waste can give rise to
the basis of an adventure as characters search for a Sewer Plague, which incubates in sewers and refuse
cure and try to stop the contagion's spread. heaps and is sometimes transmitted by creatures
that dwell in such areas, including otyughs and rats.
REST AND RECUPERATION
Any Humanoid that is wounded by a creature that
Ifa creature infected with a magical contagion carries the contagion or that comes into contact
spends 3 days recuperating—engaging in no with contaminated filth or offal must succeed on a
activities that would interrupt a Long Rest—the
DC 11 Constitution saving throw or become infected
creature makes a DC 15 Constitution saving throw with Sewer Plague. A creature suffers the following
at the end of the recuperation period. On a suc- effects 1d4 days after infection:
cessful save, the creature has Advantage on saving
throws to fight off the magical contagion for the Fatigue. The creature gains 1 Exhaustion level.
next 24 hours, ‘Weakness. While the creature has any Exhaustion
levels, it regains only half the normal number of,
EXAMPLE CONTAGIONS Hit Points from spending Hit Point Dice.
The following examples show how magical conta- Restlessness. While the creature has any Exhaus-
gions can work. Feel free to alter the saving throw tion levels, finishing a Long Rest neither restores
DCs, effects, and other characteristics of these con- lost Hit Points nor reduces the creature's Exhaus-
tagions to suit your campaign, tion level.

Fighting the Contagion. Daily at dawn, an infected
creature makes a DC 11 Constitution saving throw.
CACKLE FEVER
On a failed save, the creature gains 1 Exhaustion
Magical Contagion
level as its fatigue worsens. On a successful save,
Cheaply made potions and elixirs are sometimes the creature's Exhaustion level decreases by 1. If the
tainted by Cackle Fever, which affects Humanoids creature's Exhaustion level is reduced to 0, the con-
only (gnomes are strangely immune). A creature tagion ends on the creature.
suffers the following effects 1d4 days after infection:

Fever. The creature gains1 Exhaustion level, which
lasts until the contagion ends on the creature.
Sicut Ror
Magical Contagion
Uncontrollable Laughter. While the creature has
the Exhaustion condition, the creature makes Any Beast or Humanoid that drinks water tainted
a DC 13 Constitution saving throw each time it by Sight Rot must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
takes damage other than Psychic damage. Ona saving throw or have the Blinded condition until
failed save, the creature takes 5 (Id10) Psychic the contagion ends.
damage and has the Incapacitated condition as Fighting the Contagion. Magic such as a Heal or
it laughs uncontrollably. At the end of each o Lesser Restoration spell ends the contagion immedi-
turns, the creature repeats the save, ending the ately. A character who is proficient with an Herbal-
effect on itself
on a success. After1 minute, it suc- ism Kit can use it to create one dose of nonmagical
ceeds automatically. ointment, which takes 1 hour. When applied to the
eyes of a creature suffering from Sight Rot, the oint-
Fighting the Contagion. At the end of each Long
ment suppresses the contagion on that creature for
Rest, an infected creature makes a DC 13 Constitu-
24 hours. If the contagion is suppressed in this way
tion saving throw. After the creature succeeds on
for a total of 72 hours (requiring three doses and
three of these saves, the contagion ends on it, and
applications of the ointment), the contagion ends on
the creature is immune to Cackle Fever for I year.
the creature.
Spreading the Contagion. Any Humanoid (other
Spreading the Contagion. Any Humanoid that
than a gnome) that starts its turn within a 10-foot
makes skin contact with a creature infected with
Emanation originating from a creature infected
Sight Rot must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
with Cackle Fever must succeed on a DC 10 Consti-
saving throw or also become infected with the con-
tution saving throw or also become infected with
tagion. On a successful save, the Humanoid can’t
the contagion. On a successful save, the Humanoid
catch the contagion from that particular infected
can’t catch the contagion from that particular in-
creature for the next 24 hours.
fected creature for the next 24 hours.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX 6r

DEATH Provide Fair Warning. Let characters face the con-
sequences of their foolish actions, but make sure
Adventures involve risk, with consequences that
you give enough cues for the players to recognize
can be as catastrophic as the death of
a single char-
self-destructive actions. You might want to ask a
acter
or an entire group. Given the degree to which
player, “Are you sure?” before committing a char-
players get attached to their characters, character
acter to a potentially fatal course of action.
death can be an emotionally charged situation. It
Fair Encounters. Your players have to know that
might even be a hard limit for some players (see
you're fair in designing encounters. It’s fine to
“Ensuring Fun for All” in chapter 1), so it's worth
throw tough encounters at them and sometimes
having a conversation about how to handle charac-
to let them face monsters they can’t beat. But it’s
ter death at the start of a new game.
not fair if the players have no way to know they
can’t win the fight or have no way to escape.
DeatH Must BE FAIR
The best way to avoid hard feelings connected to ScALInG LETHALITY
the death of a beloved character is to make sure the
You can adjust the lethality of your campaign usi
players know you're being fair. Keep these princi- the encounter-building guidelines in chapter
4. If
ples in mind:
your players enjoy games that test their charac-
Don't Cheat in the Monsters’ Favor. Rolling dice in ters to the utmost and are prepared to create new
front of the players when a situation is especially characters at a moment's notice, consider using
deadly is one way to communicate that you're not high-difficulty encounters over and over, with little
cheating in the monsters’ favor or singling out a opportunity for rests between encounters, to create
single character for punishment. a more lethal adventure. Conversely, using only
Don't Make It Personal. Don't punish a character low-difficulty encounters is less likely to lead to
for a player's behavior or some personal grudge. character death, especially if characters have ample
That's probably the quickest way to undermine opportunity to rest during the adventure.
your players’ trust in you as DM and as
a fair art
ter of the rule:

Somerimes DEATH Even THE OEATH

DEFEATED, Not DEAD It’s also possible for dead characters to be brought
If you and your players agree to avoid character back to life. The most common way is through spells
death in your game, you might consider an alterna- such as Revivify and Raise Dead. It’s up to you to
tive: a character who would otherwise die is instead decide how easy it is for characters to access those
“defeated.” The following rules apply to a defeated spells if they can't cast them. The Player's Handbook
character. offers suggested prices for spellcasting services.
Comatose. The character has1 Hit Point and the
Unconscious condition. The character can regain
Wuat IF EVERYONE Dies?
Hit Points as normal, but the character remains Misadventure can wipe out an entire group. (You'll
Unconscious until they are targeted by a Greater sometimes hear players refer to this as a “total party
Restoration spell or experience a sudden awakening kill” or “TPK.”) Such a catastrophe doesn’t have to
(see below). end the whole game—rather, it presents an opportu-
Sudden Awakening. After finishing a Long Rest, nity to take the game in a new direction. Consider
the character makes a DC 20 Constitution saving these possibilities.
throw. On a successful save, the Unconscious con-
dition ends on the character. On a failed save, the A FRres START
condition persists. Everyone makes new characters, and the campaign
starts anew. This might be the most drastic option,
DEATH SCENES but it allows for new stories and fresh character
dynamics.
When a character is reduced to 0 Hit Points, the
player sometimes has to sit out one or more rounds Diving Councit
of combat with nothing to do but roll Death Saving
The characters find themselves before a council of
Throws. One way to keep a player involved in the
deities who are arguing about the characters’ fate.
game is to prompt some roleplaying along with each
The characters must convince the council to return
Death Save. You might ask the player to describe a
them to life.
memory that surfaces in the character's mind while
hovering near death. Consider these possibilities: EsCAPE FROM THE UNDERWORLD
The dead characters wake up in Hades (see chapter
Ona Successful Death Save. A memory that
6) and must find a way to escape the grim under-
inspires hope and courage. A beloved person
world and return to the world ofthe living.
who would urge the character to cling to life. A
thought of something to live for. A favorite child-
IMPRISONED
hood memory. The characters wake up in cells, kept alive and im-
Ona Failed Death Save. A memory that stirs up prisoned by their foes for some purpose.
shame or grief. A beloved person who is already
dead, beckoning the character to join them. An RAISED BY ANOTHER
experience of weariness or despair. A powerful individual finds the adventurers’ bodies

You can also reward a player who describes a mem-
and has them raised from the dead, putting the ad-
ory or something else occupying the dying charac-
venturers in the debt of their rescuer. What if the
ter’s thoughts with Advantage on the Death Save. adventurers wake up decades after their death, re-
turned to life by a Resurrection spell cast by someone
‘When a character dies, either from failed Death
who believed they had an important role to play in
Saves or from an effect that kills the character out-
this future era?
right, consider giving the player some ownership
over the character's final moments by asking what
Rescue MIssion
the character's last words are or how the character
The players create new, temporary characters who
greets death. are tasked with retrieving the bodies of the fallen
heroes, so they can be raised from the dead or given
DEALING WITH DEATH
proper burials. If the dead characters have Bastions
When a character dies, consult with the players to (see chapter 8), the stand-in party could consist of
decide what happens next. Some players are per- hirelings from those Bastions.
fectly happy to make new characters, especially
when they're eager to try out new options. A new
party member should start at the same level as the
other characters in the party and have gear of sim-
ilar value.

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX 63

Doors a successful check, the character finds any secret
door hidden in that section of wall as well as the
Adventurers interact with doors often ina D&D
mechanism to open the door. The DC ofthe check
campaign. This section gives rules for most of the
depends on how well the secret door is hidden, as
doors the adventurers encounter.
shown in the Secret Doors table.

Common Doors You can instead call for
an Intelligence (Investiga-
tion) check ifthe challenge involves deducing that
The Doors table provides the AC and Hit Points for
a door is present from noticeable clues, rather than
common doors, which are Medium objects.
spotting those clues in the first place. See “Percep-
With the Utilize action, a creature can try to tion” in chapter 2 for more advice.
force open a door that is barred or locked, doing
so with a successful Strength (Athletics) check. Secret Doors
The table provides the DC ofthe check. For bigger
Secret Door DC to Detect
doors, double or triple the Hit Points and increase
the DC of the check by 5. Barely hidden secret door 10
Standard secret door 15
Doors
Well-hidden secret door 20
Door AC HP DC to Open
Glass door B 4 10 Secret Door Eriquette
Metal door 19 72 25 Adventurers often fail to locate secret doors. For

Stone door this reason, don't hide important treasures or loca~
V7 40 20
tions behind secret doors unless you're comfortable
Wooden door 15 8 15 with the characters not finding them, and don't risk
letting your adventure grind to a halt because the
BarreD Door only path forward is hidden behind a secret door.
A barred door has no lock. A creature on the barred
side of the door can take the Utilize action to lift the PORTCULLISES
bar from its braces, allowing the door to be opened. ‘Typically made of iron or wood, a portcullis blocks
a passage or an archway until it is raised into the
Lockep Door
ceiling by a winch and chain. Creatures within
Characters who don't have the key to a locked door
5 feet ofa lowered portcullis can make ranged
can try to pick the lock using Thieves’ Tools. The
attacks or cast spells through it, and they have
Lock Complexity table tells you how long it takes to
Three-Quarters Cover against attacks, spells, and
try to pick a lock based on its complexity. At the end
other effects originating from the opposite side. A
of that time, the character picks the lock by making
portcullis can also be attacked and destroyed, using
a successful Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check using
the AC and Hit Points of a metal door (iFiron) or a
Thieves’ Tools. The DC is determined by the lock’s
wooden door (if wood).
quality, as shown in the Lock Quality table.
Winching
a portcullis up or down requires the
Utilize action. Ifa creature can't reach the winch
Lock Comptexity — Lock Quatity
(usually because it’s on the other side of the portcul-
Complexity Time Quality DC to Unlock lis), lifting the portcullis requires the Utilize action
Simple Vaction Inferior 10 and a successful Strength (Athletics) check. The DC
of the check depends on the type of portcullis, as
Complex minute Good 15
shown in the Portcullises table.
Superior 20
PorTcuLtises
Secret Doors Portcullis Size Iron DC Wood DC
A secret door is crafted to blend into the wall that Medium (8 ft. tall x Sft. wide) 20 5
surrounds it. Sometimes faint cracks in the wall or Large (10 ft. tall x 10 ft. wide) 25 20
scuff marks on the floor betray the secret door's
Huge (20 ft. tall
x 15 ft. wide) 30 25
presence, Other than the fact that it’s hidden, a se-
cret door is similar to a common door.
With the Search action, a character can search
for a secret door along a 10-foot-square section of
wall and make a Wisdom (Perception) check. On

64 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

DUNGEONS 14100

Some dungeons are old strongholds abandoned by 39-40 Built
in or among
the branches of a tree ‘
the folk who built them. Others are natural caves
41-43 Built
to house a planar portal but aban-
or lairs carved out by monsters. Dungeons attract
doned when creatures or energy from the
cults, groups of monsters, and reclusive creatures.
other side of the portal seeped into the
Because of their varied origins and purposes, dun-
dungeon
geons have a range of distinctive qualities. For
example, a dungeon that serves as a stronghold for 44-46 Carved into a meteorite (before or after it
hobgoblin soldiers has a different mood and features fell to earth)
than an ancient temple inhabited by yuan-ti. 47-49 Carved into a sheer cliff face
You can use the Dungeon Quirks table to add dis-
50-52 Caverns carved by a beholder’s disintegra-
tinctive character to a dungeon you're creating or
tion eye ray, with unnaturally smooth walls
one ina published adventure. The quirks on the ta-
and vertical shafts connecting different
ble reflect the characteristics of a dungeon’s creator,
its intended purpose, its location, or some (often levels
catastrophic) event in its history. You can use a sin- 53-55 Contains something that led to the downfall
gle quirk or combine quirks as you see fit, and roll of its creators or inhabitants
or choose a result that inspires you.
56-58 Dug as a burrow by a monster that might
still live inside
DUNGEON Quirks
59-61 Entrance concealed behind a waterfall
1d100 Quirk
62-64 Floating on the sea
01-02 Abandoned after internal strife devastated
its population 65-66 Intended as a death trap to eliminate any
creature that enters, perhaps to guard a
03-04 ‘Abandoned because the site was cursed by
treasure or to harvest souls for a necroman-
a god or other powerful entity
tic rite
05-06 ‘Abandoned by al creators when a
67-69 Intended as a tomb
plague spread through the dungeon
70-72 Long known as the site of a great miracle or
07-09 Amazingly well preserved ancient city in-
another auspicious event
side a dome encased in volcanic ash, sub-
merged underwater, or entombed in desert 73-75 Made by amphibious creatures (such as
sands kuo-toa or aboleths), using water to protect
the innermost reaches from air-breathing
10-12 Built as a fortress guarding a mountain
intruders
pass
76-78 Made by a powerful spelicaster (perhaps
13-15 Built as a maze, either to protect treasure
a lich) as a site for magical research and
from intruders or as a gauntlet where pris-
experimentation
oners were hunted by monsters
79-81 Made by giants at a vast scale
16-18, Built as a stronghold but abandoned after it
fell to invaders 82-84 Natural caverns featuring a range of strik-
ingly beautiful rock and crystal formations
19-21 Built as a treasure vault to protect powerful
85-87 On an island in an underground sea
magic items and great wealth
22-23 Built atop a cloud 88-90 On the back ofa Gargantuan creature
91-93 Originally constructed as a mine but aban-
24-26 Built beneath a city in catacombs or sewers
doned when tunnels connected to danger-
27-29 Built beneath or on top ofa mesa or several
ous Underdark tunnels
connected mesas
94-96 Secreted away in a demiplane or in a pocket
30-32 Built by a religious group
to serve as a tem-
dimension
ple and linked to the energy of other planes
of existence 97-98 Slowly abandoned as its creators died out
or migrated away
33-35 Built by dwarves and decorated with enor-
‘mous dwarven faces that have been de- 99-00 Transformed by multiple events or disasters
faced by its current inhabitants ‘over the course ofcenturies
oes

36-38 Built in a volcano

CHAPTER S| DM'S TOOLBOX 65

{A OUNGEON auitr ay ciANrs

MapPING A DUNGEON Wear and Tear. If you'd like to show wear and tear

A dungeon can range in size from a few chambers caused by time or the elements, collapsed passages
can be commonplace, cutting off formerly con-
toa huge complex of rooms and passages extending
nected sections of the dungeon from each other.
hundreds of feet. The adventurers’ goal often lies as
far from the dungeon entrance as possible, forcing Past earthquakes might have opened chasms within

characters to delve deeper underground or push a dungeon, splitting rooms and corridors to make
interesting obstacles.
farther into the heart of the complex.
A dungeon is usually mapped on a grid like graph
Natural Features. Many dungeons include nat-

paper, with each square on the paper representing
ural features. An underground stream might run

an area of 5 feet by 5 feet. Appendix B shows several through the middle ofa stronghold, causing varia-
tion in the shapes and sizes of rooms and necessitat-
examples. If you play with miniatures on a grid, this
scale makes it easy to transfer a map to a battle gri
ing features such as bridges and drains.
Secrets. Add secret doors and secret rooms to re-
Mappinc PRINCIPLES ward players who take the time to search for them
‘As you draw or adapt a dungeon map, keep the fol- For each door and room, consider their original
lowing in mind. purpose: were secret doors a defense against invad-
Asymmetry. Asymmetrical rooms and map layouts ers, or do denizens of the dungeon scheme to keep
make a dungeon interesting and unpredictable. secrets from each other? Secrets can help you de-
Three-Dimensional Layout. Stairs, ramps, lifts, velop the story ofa dungeon.
platforms, ledges, balconies, pits, and other changes
of elevation make a dungeon interesting DESIGNING DUNGEON Rooms
and make
combat encounters in those areas challenging. Keep the following things in mind when designing a
Multiple Pathways, Add multiple entrances and dungeon room:
its—to the dungeon as a whole and to individual
Ceiling Support. Underground chambers are prone
rooms. By offering multiple paths the characters
to collapse, so many rooms—particularly large
can follow, you present meaningful decision points
‘ones—have arched ceilings or pillars to support
to the players.
the weight of the rock overhead,

66 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

Decoration. Most sapient creatures decorate their SHRINES
Jairs. Statues, bas-reliefs, murals, and mosaics of- Any sapient creature might have some place ded-
ten adorn dungeon rooms. Equally common are icated to worship. Depending on the creature's
scrawled messages, marks, and maps left behind resources and piety, such a shrine can be humble
by others who have passed through the area. or extensive. Adventurers are likely to encounter
Some of these marks are simply graffiti, while priests, cultists, and similar creatures there, and
others may be useful to adventurers who examine wounded monsters might flee to a shrine to seek
them closely. healing.
Exits. Creatures that can't open doors can't make a
lair in a sealed room without some sort of exter- Vauits
nal assistance. Strong creatures without the abil- A vault contains treasure and is usually sealed
ity to open doors smash them down if necessary. behind a locked or secret door. Many vaults are
Burrowing creatures might dig their own exits. further protected by magic, monsters that can sur-
vive without food and water, and traps (see “Traps”
Common dungeon rooms fall into the broad catego-
in this chapter).
ries described below.
Work AREAS
Crypts
Sapient creatures often have laboratories, work-
Although it sometimes resembles a vault, a crypt
shops, libraries, forges, and studios. Because such
can also be a series of individual rooms, each with
areas tend to contain valuable equipment, their
its own sarcophagus, or a long hall with recesses on
doors are often locked and sometimes even warded
either side to hold coffins or bodies.
by Glyph of Warding spells and similar effects.
rypt builders who are worried about undead
rising from the grave lock and trap crypts from DuNcEon Decay
the outside—making the crypts easy to get into but
difficult to exit. Other builders worried about tomb
The States of Ruin table can help you determine the
general conditions ofa dungeon area.
robbers make their crypts difficult to get into. Some
builders make both entry and exit difficult, just to
States oF RUIN
be safe.
1d6 Features
Guarp Posts 1 Perilous. The area is dangerously worn and
Sapient, social denizens ofthe dungeon generally
prone to collapse. Any impacts or damage to
guard the entrances to their shared spaces. A guard
the structure, including from spells and other
post may just be a room with a table where bored
areas ofeffect, have a 50 percent chance of
sentries play a dice game, or it might be a pair of
causing a collapse.
iron golems backed up by spellcasters hiding in bal-
conies overhead. 2. Crumbling. Areas within the dungeon section
‘When you design a guard post, decide how many are choked with rubble and have
a 50 percent
guards are on duty, note their Passive Perception chance
of being Difficult Terrain.
Half Cover
scores, and decide what they do when they notice and hiding places are plentiful.
intruders (see “Monster Behavior” in chapter 4).
3 Neglected. One dungeon hazard—such
Some will rush headlong into a fight, while others
as brown mold, green slime, or yellow
will negotiate, sound an alarm, or flee to get help.
mold (see “Hazards” in this chapter)—is
LIVING QUARTERS abundant.
Most creatures have a lair where they can rest, eat, 4 Abandoned. Most of the dungeon is de-
and store their treasure. Living quarters commonly serted. Dexterity (Stealth) checks have Dis-
include beds (if the creatures sleep), possessions
advantage because any sounds stand out as
(both valuable and mundane), and some sort of food
unusual.
preparation area (anything from a well-stocked
5 Secure. Ability checks made to break down
kitchen to a firepit to a hunk of rotting meat).
doors, open locks, or carry out similar activi-
NATURAL SUBTERRANEAN AREAS ties have Disadvantage.
Built dungeons often intersect with natural caverns,
6 Thriving. The dungeon is heavily populated.
grottoes, and passages that are home to subterra-
Any loud noises draw the attention of nearby
nean creatures, strange rock formations, pools of
creatures.
water, molds, fungi, and bioluminescent moss.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX
67

ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS the end ofeach hour or gain 1 Exh
austion level.
Characters crossing a frigid tundra Creatures that have Resistance or Imm
might suffer the unity to Cold
effects of extreme cold, while a visi damage automatically succeed
t to a cloud gi- on the save.
ant’s castle might subject character
s to the effects of
high altitude. The following sections
EXTREME HEAT
provide rules
for handling these and other enviro When the temperature is 100 degree
nmental effects. s Fahrenheit or
higher, a creature exposed to
the extreme heat and
Deap Macic ZonE a without access to drinkable
water must succeed on
A dead magic zone is an area whe a Constitution saving throw at the
re the fabric of end of each hour
magic is torn. The effect is the sam or gain 1 Exhaustion level. The DC
e as the Antimagic is 5 for the first
Field spell, except that it is permanent and hour and increases by 1 for each add
typically itional hour.
Creatures wearing Medium or He
covers an area no more
than 300 feet in diamet
er.
avy armor have
Disadvantage on the save. Cre
atures that have Re-
DEEP WATER sistance or Immunity to Fir
e damage automatically
‘Swimming through deep wat succeed on the save.
er (more than 100 feet
deep) presents additional challenge
s because ofthe FRIGID WATER
water's pressure and cold
temperature. After each
hour of swimming in deep water, A creature can be immersed
a creature that in frigid water for a
lacks a Swim Speed must succeed on number of minutes equal to
a DC 10 Con- its Constitution score
stitution saving throw or gain before suffering any ill effects. Eac
1 Exhaustion level. h additional min-
ute spent in frigid water requires the creatu
re to
EXTREME COLD succeed on a DC 10 Consti
tution saving throw or
‘When the temperature is 0 deg gain I Exhaustion level. Creatu
rees Fahrenheit or res with Resistance
lower, a creature exposed to the or Immunity to Cold damage automa
extreme cold must tically sue-
succeed on a DC 10 Consti ceed on the save, as do creatures
tution saving throw at that are naturally
adapted to living
in ice-cold water.

68 CHAPTER 3 | DM's
TOOLBOX

HEAVY PRECIPITATION the caster must succeed on a DC 10 Charisma sav-
ing throw, or the spell fails and is wasted.
Everything within an area of heavy rain or heavy
snowfall is Lightly Obscured, and creatures in the WinDs OF PANDEMONIUM
area have Disadvantage on all Wisdom (Perception) ‘The winds of Pandemonium are common in Pan-
checks. Heavy rain also extinguishes open flames. demonium and regions where its influence is felt,
including parts of the Underdark. A creature makes
Hicu ALTITUDE
a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw after each hour
Traveling at altitudes of 10,000 feet or higher above spent among the howling winds. On a failed save,
sea level is taxing for most creatures because of the the creature gains 1 Exhaustion level. The winds
reduced amount of oxygen in the air. Each hour can't increase a creature's Exhaustion level above
such a creature spends traveling at high altitude 3. Finishing a Long Rest doesn't reduce a creature's
counts as 2 hours for the purpose of determining Exhaustion level unless the creature can somehow
how long that creature can travel (see “Travel Pace” escape the winds.
in chapter 2).
Creatures can become acclimated to a high alti- SLIPPERY IcE
tude by spending 30 days or more at this elevation. Slippery ice is Difficult Terrain. A creature that
Creatures can’t become acclimated to elevations moves onto slippery ice for the first time ona
above 20,000 feet unless they are native to such turn or starts its turn there must succeed on a
environments. DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone
condition.
PLANAR EFFECTS
Certain planes of existence—and areas on the Ma- STRONG WIND
terial Plane affected by them—have supernatural Strong wind imposes Disadvantage on ranged at-
effects on creatures within them. Several examples tack rolls with weapons. It also extinguishes open
are presented below. See chapter 6 for more infor- flames and disperses fog. A flying creature in a
mation about the planes of existence. strong wind must land at the end of its turn or fall.
Asstrong wind in a desert can create a sandstorm
ACHERONIAN BLoopLusT
that imposes Disadvantage on Wisdom (Perception)
The plane of Acheron rewards a creature for harm-
checks.
ing other creatures by imbuing it with the strength
to keep fighting. While in Acheron or a region un- THIN IcE
der its influence, a creature gains Temporary Hit
‘Thin ice has a weight tolerance of Sd10 10 pounds
Points equal to half its Hit Point maximum when-
per 10-foot-square area. Whenever the total weight
ever it reduces another creature to 0 Hit Points.
on an area ofthin ice exceeds its tolerance, the ice
ARCADIAN VITALITY in that area breaks. All creatures on broken ice fall
On the plane of Arcadia and in regions where its through. Below the ice is frigid water (see “Frigid
influence is felt, creatures benefit from supernatural Water” above).
vitality, which grants them Immunity to the Fright-
ened and Poisoned conditions.
WiLp Macic ZONE
A past magical disaster or uncontrolled surge of
BLESSED BENEFICENCE power in a particular place can cause the fabric of
On the plane of Mount Celestia and in regions magic to unravel, creating a wild magic zone. In
where its influence is felt, creatures are blessed by such an area, which is typically no more than 300
the pervasive beneficence ofthe plane. Creatures feet in diameter, magic behaves unpredictably.
other than Fiends and Undead gain the benefit of ‘Whenever a creature expends a spell slot to cast a
the Bless spell as long as they remain in an area of spell in a wild magic zone, roll 1420. If you roll a 20
blessed beneficence. In addition, such a creature on the die, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table in the
that finishes a Long Rest in the area gains the bene- Player’s Handbook to create a magical effect.
fit of a Lesser Restoration spell.

GEHENNAN CRUELTY
On the plane of Gehenna and in regions where
its influence is felt, creatures are driven to loathe
helping one another. Whenever a creature subject
to Gehennan cruelty casts a spell that restores Hit
Points or removes a condition other than Invisible,

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

FEAR AND MENTAL STRESS MENTAL Stress EFFECTS
Due to the nature of their vocation, adventurers When a character is subjected to an effect that
tend to be less susceptible to fear and mental stress causes intense mental stress, Psychic damage is the
than common folk. Whereas a farmer might flee in best way to emulate that effect.
terror from a bear or an apparition, adventurers are The Sample Mental Stress Effects table provides a
made of sterner stuff. That said, certain creatures few examples of such effects, with suggested saving
and game effects can terrify or fray the mind of throw DCs and damage. Mental stress can usually
even the most stalwart adventurer. be resisted with a successful Wisdom save, but
Ifyou plan to use any of these rules, discuss them sometimes an Intelligence or Charisma save is more
with your players at the start of the campaign. See appropriate. On a successful save, a character might
“Ensuring Fun for All” in chapter 1. take half
as much damage instead of no damage, at
your discreti
FEAR EFFECTS
Whenever the characters encounter something that SAMPLE MENTAL Stress EFFECTS
is supernaturally frightful, use the Frightened con-
dition as the baseline effect. Fear effects typically Example
require a Wisdom saving throw, with a save
DC A character ingests a hallucino-
based on how terrifyithe
ng situation is. The Sample
genic substance that distorts the
Fear DCs table provides some examples.
character's perception of reality,
SAMPLE Fear DCs A character touches afiendish idol
15 36
Example Save DC that tears at the character's mind,

When the characters open a sarcopha- threatening to shatter it.
10
gus, a harmless yet terrifying apparition Amagical trap flings acharacter 20» 96
appears. into the Far Realm until the end of

A character triggers a magical trap that that character's next turn.
15
creates an illusory manifestation of that
character's worst fears, visible only to that PROLONGED EFFECTS
character. Exposure to mental stress can cause prolonge
d ef-
fects. Consider the following possibilities.
A portal to the Abyss opens, revealing
2 Short-Term Effects. The character has the Frig
a nightmarish realm of torment and ht-
ened, Incapacitated, or Stunned condition for
slaughter. 1d10
minutes. This condition might be acc
ompanied by
‘Typically, a Frightened creature repeats the alarming behavior or hallucinations. These effe
saving cts
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the can be suppressed with the Calm Emotions spel
ef. l or
removed by the Lesser Restoration spell.
fect on itself on a success,
Long-Term Effects. The character has Dis
At your discretion, a Frightened creature might advan-
be subject to other effects as long as the Frighten tage on some or all ability checks for
1d10 » 10
ed
condition lasts. Consider these examples: hours, stemming from an unwillingness or inabilit
y
to exert a particular set ofabilitie
s. The character
+ The Frightened creature must take
the Dash ac- might feel enervated and unable to
exert much
tion on each ofits turns and uses its movement Strength, for example, or become so sus
to picious of
get farther away from the source of its fear
. others that Charisma checks are more difficul
t.
+ Attack rolls against the Frightened creature
have These effects can be suppressed with the
Calm Emo-
Advantage.
tions spell or removed by the Lesser Rest
oration spell.
+ The Frightened creature can do only
one of the Indefinite Effects. An indefinite effect
following on each of its turns: move, tak is a long-
e an ac- term effect (see above) that lasts until rem
tion, or take a Bonus Action. oved by
a Greater Restoration spell. It can
be suppressed by a
Calm Emotions spell.

70 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TO
OLBOX

FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES AMMUNITION
Firearm Bullets are destroyed upon use in a modern
Renaissance-era pistols and muskets appear in
firearm. Futuristic firearms use Energy Cells that
the Player’s Handbook. In a campaign involving a
become depleted but could possibly be recharged
crashed spaceship or elements of modern-day Earth,
with the proper equipment, at your discretion. An
characters might find the items described here.
Energy Cell weighs 1/2 Ib.
FIREARMS EXPLOSIVES
The Firearms table provides examples of modern
The Explosives tablehas examples of explosives. If
and futuristic firearms. If you make them available is given for an explosive, it can't typical
for purchase (perhaps in the fantastical market- bought. If you make these explosives available for
places
of the City of Brass), treat modern items as
purchase, treat them as Rare magic items. Rules for
Rare magic items
and futuristic items as Very
Rare
explosives are given below.
ones (see chapter 7).
Boma
PROPERTIES
Asan action, you can light a Bomb and throw it at
Some weapons in the Firearms table have the
a point up to 60 feet away, where it explodes. Each
following properties, in addition to properties
creature in a 5-foot-radius Sphere centered on that
described in the Player's Handbook.
point makes a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking
Burst Fire. As an action, you can expend 10 pieces
3d6 Fire damage on a failed save or half asmuch
ofa Burst Fire weapon's ammunition to spray shots
damage on a successful one.
ina 10-foot Cube within the weapon's normal range.
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC DYNAMITE STICK
15 Dexterity saving throw or take damage. Roll the An an action, you can light a Dynamite Stick and
weapon's damage once, and apply it to each creature throw it at a point up to 60 feet away, where it ex-
that failed the save. plodes. Each creature in a 5-foot-radius Sphere cen-
Reload. You can make a limited number of shots tered on that point makes a DC 12 Dexterity saving
with a Reload weapon. You must then reload the throw, taking 346 Force damage on a failed save or
‘weapon as an action or a Bonus Action. half as much damage on a successful one.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

FIREARMS
Modern Item Damage Properties Mastery Weight
Martial Ranged Weapons
Automatic Rifle 2d8 Piercing Ammunition (Range 80/240; Bullet), Burst Fire, Slow Bib.
Reload (30 shots), Two-Handed
Hunting Rifle 2d10 Piercing Ammunition (Range 80/240; Bullet), Slow Bib.
Reload (5 shots), Two-Handed
Revolver 2d8 Piercing Ammunition (Range 40/120; Bullet), Sap 3b.
Reload (6 shots)

Semiautomatic Pistol 2d6 Piercing Ammunition (Range 50/150; Bullet), Vex 3b.
Reload (15 shots)

Shotgun 2d8 Piercing Ammunition (Range 30/90; Bullet), Push 7b.
Reload (2 shots), Two-Handed

Futuristic Item Damage Properties Mastery Weight
Martial Ranged Weapons
Antimatter Rifle 6d8 Necrotic Ammunition (Range 120/360; Energy Cell), Sap 101b.
Reload (2 shots), Two-Handed

Laser Pistol 3d6 Radiant + Ammunition (Range 40/120; Energy Cell), Vex 2b.
Reload (50 shots)

Laser Rifle 3d8 Radiant + Ammunition (Range 100/300; Energy Cell), slow 7Ib.
Reload (30 shots), Two-Handed

It takes 1 minute to bind two or more Dynamite ExpLosives
Sticks together so they explode at the same time. Item Cost Weight
Each stick after the first increases the damage by
Bomb 100GP 1 Ib.
1d6 (to a maximum of 1046) and the effect's radius
by 5 feet (to a maximum of 20 feet). Dynamite Stick = 1b
It takes 1 minute to rig dynamite with a longer Grenade, Fragmentation = 1b.
fuse so it explodes after a longer period of time,
Grenade Launcher — 7h
such as1 minute or 10 minutes.
Grenade, Smoke SOGP Ib.
GRENADES AND GRENADE LAUNCHERS
Gunpowder (keg) 250GP 201.
Asan action, you can either throw a grenade at a
point up to 60 feet away or use a Grenade Launcher Gunpowder (powder horn) 35GP Ib.
to propel the grenade to a point up to 1,000 feet
away. The grenade explodes at that point, creating a ALIEN TECHNOLOGY
particular effect in a 20-foot-radius Sphere.
When adventurers find a piece of technology that
Fragmentation Grenade. Each creature in the
isn’t from their world or time period, they can
Sphere makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, tak-
deduce what itis with a successful Intelligence
ing 17 (5d6) Piercing damage on a failed save or half
(Investigation) check, with the DC depending on
as much damage on a successful one.
the complexity of the item: DC 10 for a relatively
‘Smoke Grenade. The area ofthe Sphere is Heavily
simple item like a calculator or a lighter, or DC 20
Obscured by smoke for 1 minute. A strong wind
fora complex item such as a computer, a chainsaw,
(such as the Gust of Wind spell) disperses the smoke.
ora hovercraft. You may require a separate Intelli-
GUNPOWDER gence (Investigation) check to determine whether a
Setting fire to a container full of Gunpowder causes, character can activate or operate the technology; a

it to explode. When a container explodes, each character who has observed the item in use or has
creature in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on the operated a similar item either has Advantage on the
container makes a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, check or succeeds on the check automatically (your
taking 10 (3d6) Fire damage (for a powder horn) or choice).
24 (746) Fire damage (for a keg) on a failed save or
half as much damage on a successful one.
CHAPTER 3 | DM'S TOOLBOX 73

Gops AND OTHER POWERS the activities of mortal life or limited aspects of the
natural world. They share the fundamentally ineffa-
Different deities rule the various aspects ofthe cos-
ble nature of greater gods, but they are more likely
mos and mortal life, sometimes cooperating with
to manifest in mortal realms.
each other, sometimes competing. People gather in
Quasi-deities have a divine origin, but they don't
public shrines to worship gods oflife and wisdom or
receive or answer prayers. They are still immensely
meet in hidden places to venerate gods of deception
powerful beings, and in theory, they could
or destruction. ascend
to godhood if they amass enough worshipers.
Divine RANK Quasi-deities fall into the following subcategories:

The divine beings of the multiverse are often cat- Demigods are divine beings with mortal origin.
egorized according to their relative cosmic power. Some were born mortal and attained godhood,
Some gods who are worshiped on multiple worlds while others were born from the union of
a deity
have a different rank on each world, depending on and a mortal. Their mortal parentage makes demi-
their influence there. gods the weakest quasi-deities,
Greater deities are generally the oldest gods ofa Titans are the creations of deities. They might be
pantheon, responsible (at least in myth) for creating manufactured on a divine forge, born from the
or parenting the other gods. Their provinces blood spilled by a god, or otherwise brought abou
are t
major areas of nature and mortal life, such as agri- through divine will or substance. Some titans, in-
culture, the sun, and death. Greater deities are ul- cluding krakens and the tarrasque, appear in the
timately beyond mortal understanding, and they're Monster Manual.
often known by different names across regions, Vestiges are deities who have lost nearly all their
cultures, and worlds. Having no fixed appearance or worshipers and are considered dead from a mortal
gender, they can assume whatever forms they like. perspective. Esoteric rituals can sometimes con-
Occasionally these deities manifest and perform tact vestiges and draw on their latent powe
r.
mythic deeds among mortals.
Lesser deities are typically described in myth as. HOME PLANE AND ALIGNMENT
the creations, children, or servitors of the grea Gods aren't defined by mortal conceptions of
ter align-
deities. They govern narrower provinces, such as ment, and different mortal worshipers might in-
terpret a god's behavior and teachings thro
ugh the
BUILD Your OwN PANTHEON lens of different alignments. That said, gods tend
Most of the published D&D settings described tolive on the Outer Planes that most closely match
in chapter 5 have their own pantheons ofgods. If their general alignment tendencies, so it's safe to
you're creating your own setting, you can use the assume that the teachings of a god who resides in
list of Greyhawk gods in chapter 5 or build your Pandemonium (a plane of rampant chaos and evil)
,
‘own pantheon. encourage behavior that is Chaotic Evil, whil
e a god
A simple way to build a basic pantheon is to who resides in Elysium (the plane of pure good) en-
create one god for each of the Outer Planes de- courages Neutral Good behavior.
scribed in chapter 6, except for the Nine Hells People can worship a god without obeying that
(ruled by the archdevil Asmodeus) and the Abyss god's tenets or conforming to the god's presumed
(the domain of demons). So Arborea might be ignment. People from all walks oflife might par-
the domain of a god who is patron of the arts, ticipate in the annual festival of innocent mischief
celebrated at great feasts, while Gehenna’s deity associated with a trickster god—even peop
le whose
might be a greedy, vengeful god worshiped by sament is generally lawful and opposed to the
people ofthe samme bent. If you prefer, you can ster’s teachings. To stave off disease, good-
also put multiple deities on the same plane, so hearted people might make offerings to appease
the
Arcadia might be home to twin gods who are pa- wrath of a god associated with plague. Even Cleric
trons of merchants and smiths. characters don't need to have any particular align-
Alternatively, you might decide that your world ment to serve their gods.

has only one god (who might be viewed differ-
ently by various sects or religions) or one good Gops AND Divine Macio
god and one evil god. Or your world might be Divine magic—which includes the spells cast by
alive with spirits great and small, from lesser river Clerics, Druids, Paladins, and Rangers—is mediated
spirits to the godlike spirits who inhabit great. through beings and forces that are categorized as
mountains. Impersonal forces and philosophies divine. These can include gods but also include
the
can also fill the role of gods in a campaign primal forces of nature, the beneficent power of

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

ancestral spirits, the sacred weight of a Paladin’s victory, nor should a god's interference portend
cath, and impersonal principles or entities such immediate defeat. Gods can act to change the bal-
as Fate or the order of the universe. These beings ance of an encounter or offeran avenue of escape,
and forces grant characters the power to wield the but they count on mortal heroes to act like heroes.
magic of their planar domains.
With those principles in mind, you might have gods
For game purposes, wielding divine power isn't,
intervene in dire situations in one of these ways:
dependent on the gods’ ongoing approval or the
strength of a character's devotion. The power is a Blessings. A god might bestow a Blessing (see
sift offered to a select few; once given, it can't be “Supernatural Gifts” in this chapter) to help a
rescinded, character in need.
That said, characters’ relationships with the di- Emissaries. A god might send a Celestial, a Fiend,
vine forces they access to wield their magic, much or some other kind of emissary to aid a character
like Warlocks' relationships with their patrons, with information, guidance, or combat.
are ripe for exploration. A Cleric might accompany Miracles. As the simplest form of miracle, a god
every casting of
a spell with a litany of complaints can produce the effect of any spell that devotees
directed at the gods. The Paladin class description of that god might cast (typically Cleric or Druid
in the Player's Handbook offers some suggestions for spells). But a god's direct intervention can take
how a player might roleplay a situation where their any form you choose, often reflecting the god’s
Paladin has broken their oath. You can also decide nature.
how NPCs react to a character whose behavior
doesn't square with the ideals implied by the Holy CREATING RELIGIONS
Symbol the character wears. A list of gods is a good starting point, and it can be
sufficient to get a campaign started. But you can add
DivinE KNOWLEDGE more depth to your campaign world by fleshing out
‘The Commune spell allows its caster to ask a deity more details of religious belief and practice.
(or an agent of the god) yes-or-no questions and
MyTHs
receive correct information, and other spells of the
Divination school have similar effects. As the Com- Stories about the gods explore their relationships
with each other, with the natural world, and with
mune spell description states, gods aren't necessarily
the realm of mortals. Myths might describe familial
omniscient. But they are tremendously knowledge-
relationships among the gods, deeds of creation,
able, particularly with regard to their particular
areas of influence. A sea god can be reasonably ex- past interactions with mortals, or battles between
gods and other cosmic forces. Given the incompre-
pected to know anything that has happened in or on
a sea, for example, and a martial god knows details
hensible nature of the gods, these myths might not
actually reveal anything about the gods, but they
about wars. Gods can reliably predict the future, at
least in the short term (hence their ability to answer certainly describe people’s understanding of their
own place in relation to the gods.
spells such as Augury and Divination). And some
gods might be unwilling to reveal their ignorance,
RELIGIOUS PRACTICE
choosing to give an unclear answer rather than ad-
People honor multiple gods ofa pantheon in differ-
mit that they don't know the truth.
ent circumstances. A person might burn incense
toa hearth or family deity at a kitchen altar in the
DIVINE INTERVENTION
morning, pray to a deity of the hunt while hunting
In some campaigns, gods are fond of meddling in in the afternoon, and join a communal harvest feast
mortal affairs, and heroes sometimes call on the at the temple of an agricultural deity in the evening.
gods for aid beyond what divine magic ordinarily Cities and large towns can host numerous tem-
provides. The gods sometimes also send dreams, ples dedicated to individual gods important to the
omens, or emissaries to direct mortals along a community, while smaller settlements might have
certain path. Keep these two principles in mind a single shrine devoted to any gods the locals re-
to guide your use ofdivine intervention in your vere. Temples and shrines outside settlements often
campaign: mark places where a god (or the manifestation of
Don't Eliminate Character Choice. The gods can a god) appeared or caused a miracle. These sites
tell characters to do things and even threaten to can become the focus of pilgrims who travel long
punish them if they don't do things, but the gods distances to partake in the holy power assumed to

can't control mortal actions. linger there.
Don't Eliminate Risk and Danger. The interven-
tion ofa god should never guarantee success or

CHAPTER 3|DM’'STOOLBOX 75,

HAZARDS A fireball fungus has AC 10, HP 6, and Immunity
to Psychic damage. When it drops to 0 Hit Points,
‘The Player’s Handbook describes common hazards
the fungus explodes as if a Fireball spell (save DC 15)
that adventurers encounter, such as falling and
had been centered on it.
dehydration. This section details some unusual
At Higher Levels. The explosion of a fireball fun-
hazards you can add to a location to make it more
gus causes other fireball fungi in the area of effect
challenging.
to explode as well. You can scale the hazard for
higher levels by adding one additional fungus at lev-
SEVERITY AND LEVEL
els {1-16 or three additional fungi at levels 17-20.
Each hazard in this section is designated as a nui-
sance or as deadly for characters of certain levels.
A nuisance hazard is unlikely to seriously harm GREEN SLIME
characters of the indicated levels, whereas a deadly ‘Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4)
hazard can grievously damage characters of the
Acidic green slime devours flesh, organic material,
indicated levels.
and metal on contact. Bright green, wet, and sticky,
Use caution when introducing
a hazard to charac-
it clings to walls, floors, and ceilings in patches.
ters of a level lower than the hazard’s level range. A
One patch of green slime covers a 5-foot square.
hazard that is a nuisance at one level range could be
Green slime has Blindsight with a range of
30 feet,
deadly to characters in the nextlower range.
and it drops from walls and ceilings when it detects
EXAMPLE HAZARDS movement below itself. Beyond that, it can't move.
A creature aware of the slime’s presence can avoid
Hazards are presented in alphabetical order.
being struck by it with a successful DC 10 Dexterity
saving throw.
A creature that comes in contact with green slime
Brown MoLp
takes 5 (Id10) Acid damage. The creature takes the
Deadly Hazard (Levels 5-10) or Nuisance Hazard (Levels
damage again at the start of each of its turns until
1-16)
the slime is scraped off (requiring an action) or de-
Brown mold resembles a furry, light-brown carpet. stroyed. Against wood or metal, green slime deals 11
This fungus feeds on warmth, drawing heat from (2410) Acid damage each round, and any nonmagi-
anything around itself. One patch of brown mold cal wood or metal item used to scrape off the green
covers a 10-foot square, and the temperature within slime is destroyed.
30 feet of it is always frigid. Direct sunlight or any amount of Cold, Fire, or
When a creature enters a space within 5 feet of Radiant damage destroys a patch of green slime.
the mold for the first time on a turn or starts its
turn there, the creature makes a DC 12 Consti-
tution saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) Cold dam- INFERNO
age on a failed save or half
as much damage on a Deadly Hazard (Levels 5-10) or Nuisance Hazard (Levels
successful one. 11-16)
Brown mold has Immunity to Fire damage, and
Whenever an uncontrolled fire spreads, it can cre-
any source of fire brought within 5 feet of it causes
ate an inferno that quickly engulfs creatures, ob-
the mold to instantly expand across a surface and
jects, and vegetation.
toward the fire, creatinga new patch that covers a
An inferno consists of at least four contiguous
10-foot square. A patch of brown mold exposed to
10-foot Cubes offire. Each of the inferno’s 10-foot
an effect that deals any amount of Cold damage is
Cubes can be doused with 10 gallons of water. Ex-
destroyed instantly.
posure to a strong wind forI minute causes the
inferno to grow, adding 1d4 new 10-foot Cubes to its
volume. An inferno deprived of fuel burns itself out
FIREBALL FuNcus
after 1d10 minutes.
Deadly Hazard (Levels 5-10)
An inferno damages any vegetation or object that
AA fireball fungus is a Small, inanimate mushroom isn't being worn or carried that it touches, dealing
that can grow anywhere fungi are found in abun- 22 (4d10) Fire damage immediately and again at the
dance. Its luminous, orange cap sheds Bright Light end of each minute. Any creature that enters the
ina 15-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional inferno for the first time on a turn or starts its turs
15 feet. there takes 22 (4d10) Fire damage and is burning.

76 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

Porsonous Gas Quicksanp Pit
Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4)
Poisonous gas is usually encountered in an enclosed A quicksand pit is 10 feet deep and covers the
ace, such as a sewer or sealed tomb. The gas fills ground in a 10-foot square. A creature that enters
much space as it can, up to a maximum of ten 10- the area sinks 1d4 + 1 feet into the quicksand and
ot Cubes. The transparent gas carries a foul odor. has the Restrained condition. At the start of each
he gas is continuously or periodically replenished of the creature's turns, it sinks another ld4 feet.
by some natural or magical source, though a strong long as the creature isn’t completely submerged in
wind disperses the gas for1 minute, quicksand, it can take an action to try to escape, do-
Any creature that enters poisonous gas for the ing so with a successful Strength (Athletics) check
first time on a turn or starts its turn there makes (DC 10 plus the number offeet the creature has
2 DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 5 (Id10) sunk into the quicksand). A creature that is com-
n damage on a failed save or half as much pletely submerged in quicksand has Total Cover and
damage on a successful one. Creatures in the gas the Blinded condition and risks suffocation,
also have Disadvantage on Death Saving Throws. A creature can pull another creature within its,
At Higher Levels. You can scale the hazard for reach out ofa quicksand pit by taking an action and
higher levels by increasing the Poison damage and succeeding on a Strength (Athletics) check (DC 5
the save DC, as shown in the following table. plus the number of feet the creature has sunk into
the quicksand).
Levels Poison Damage Save DC
At Higher Levels. You can scale this hazard for
510 11 (2410) 4
higher levels by making the pit deeper and increa:
M16 22 (4d10) 16 ing the number of feet a creature sinks at the start
of each of its turns, as shown in the following table.
7-20 55 (10d10) 18

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX

Levels Pit Depth —_—Sinking Rate rockslide. On a successful save, a creature takes half
as much damage only.
5-10 15 feet 1d6 feet
When the rockslide stops, its space becomes Diffi-
m6 20 feet 148 feet cult Terrain, and all Prone creatures in its space are
7-20 30 feet 1d10 feet buried under rocks and debris. A creature buried in
this way has the Restrained condition and has Total
Cover. As an action, a creature can try to crawl out
RAZORVINE from under the rock pile. If the creature succeeds
ona DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check, itis no lon-
‘Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4)
ger Restrained; instead, it has the Prone condition
Razorvine is a plant that grows in wild tangles and
and is atop the rock pile. If the check fails, the crea-
hedges. It also clings to the sides of buildings and
ture remains buried and gains 1 Exhaustion level.
other surfaces as ivy does. A 10-foot-high, 10-foot-
A creature that has neither the Incapacitated nor
wide, 5-foot-thick wall or hedge of razorvine has AC
the Restrained condition can spend 1 minute freeing
U1; HP 25; and Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing,
another creature buried by the rockslide,
and Psychic damage.
At Higher Levels. You can scale this hazard for
When a creature comes into contact with razor-
higher levels by increasing the Bludgeoning damage
vine for the first time on a turn, the creature must
as follows: 22 (4di0) at levels 5-10, 55 (10d10) at
succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or take
levels 11-16, and 99 (18d10) at levels 17-20.
5 (Id10) Slashing damage from the bladelike thorns.

Vicious VINE
River Styx
‘Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4)
Nuisance Hazard (Levels 11-16)
Vicious vines are animated by magic. They often
The River Styx courses through the Lower Planes.
cling to doorways, archways, walls, and statuary.
Tasting or touching its waters can shatter a crea- Until a vicious vine moves, there's nothing to distin-
ture’s intellect and personality, as well as strip away
guish it from an inanimate vine.
its memories. Certain Fiends are immune to the
Each vicious vine has AC 11; HP 16; and Immunity
river's effects.
to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Psychic damage.
Unless immune to the river's effects, a creature
When a creature enters a space within 5 feet of the
that drinks from the Styx, enters the river, or starts
vine for the first time on a turn or starts its turn
its turn in the river makes a DC 20 Intelligence
there, the vine tries to coil around that creature.
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 19
The target must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity sav-
(Bd12) Psychic damage and can't cast spells or take
ing throw or have the Grappled condition (escape
the Magic action for 30 days. An affected creature
DC 12). While Grappled in this way, the target
can drink from the Styx and swim in its waters
takes 5 (Id10) Necrotic damage from the vine's
without suffering any additional effects.
life-draining thorns at the start of each of the tar-
The effect can be ended only by the Greater Res-
get's turns. The vine can grapple only one creature
toration, Heal, or Wish spell. Ifthe effect isn't ended
at atime.
after 30 days, the effect becomes permanent, and As an Influence action, a character under the ef-
the creature loses all its memories. At that point,
fect of a Speak with Plants spell or similar magic can
nothing short of a Wish spell or divine intervention
try to persuade the vine to release its victim, doing
can undo the effect.
so with a successful DC 10 Charisma (Persuasion)
Water taken from the River Styx loses its potency check. A creature released by the vine in this way
after 24 hours, becoming a harmless, foul-tasting
won't be attacked by that vine again for the next
liquid. Arcanaloths, night hags, and other fell
24 hours.
creatures might know rituals that can prolong the
At Higher Levels. You can scale the hazard for
water's potency, at your discretion.
higher levels by increasing the Necrotic damage,
the save DC, and the escape DC, as shown in the
following table.
ROCKSLIDE
Deadly Hazard (Levels 1-4) Levels Necrotic Damage Save/Escape DC
When a rockslide occurs, every creature in its path 5410 11 (2d10) 4
makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed m6 22 (4d10) 6
save, a creature takes 11 (2410) Bludgeoning dam-
17-20 55 (10d10) 8
age, has the Prone condition, and moves with the

78 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

‘When caver IN A WED, 11's 8ez7 ro GET Our

WEBS YeLLow Motp
Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Deadly Hazard (Levels 1-4) or isance Hazard (Levels
Giant spiders weave thick, sticky webs across p 5-10)

ages and at the bottom of pits to snare prey. These Yellow mold grows in dark places, and one patch
web-filled areas are Difficult Terrain, covers a 5-foot square. If touched, the mold ejects a
A creature that enters a web-filled area for the cloud ofspores that fills a 10-foot Cube. Any crea-
first time on a turn or starts its turn there must suc- ture in that area must succeed on a DC 15 Constitu-
ceed on a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or have the tion saving throw or take 11 (2d10) Poison damage
Restrained condition. As an action, a creature Re and have the Poisoned condition forI minute. While
strained by the webs can try to escape from them, Poisoned in this way, the creature takes 5 (Id10)
doing so with a successful DC 12 Strength (Athlet- Poison damage at the start of each of its turns. The
or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. creature repeats the save at the end ofeach of its
Each 10-foot Cube of webs has AC 10; HP 15; Vul- turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
nerability to Fire damage; and Immunity to Pie Direct sunlight or any amount of Fire damage
ing, Poison, and Psychic damage. destroys a patch of yellow mold.

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S Ti

MARKS OF PRESTIGE the gift of a fortification as a pretext for the charac-
ters acquiring their Bastions.
Sometimes the most memorable reward for adven-
The individual bequeathing the fortification might
turers is the prestige they acquire throughout a
offer to pay its maintenance costs for one or more
realm. Their adventures often earn them fame and
months, after which the characters inherit that re-
power, allies and enemies, and titles the adventur-
sponsibility. The type offortification determines its
ers can pass on to their descendants. This section
maintenance costs, as shown in the Maintenance
details the most common marks of prestige that ad-
Costs table.
venturers might acquire during a campaign.
‘The best rewards in an adventure are directly re- MAINTENANCE Costs
lated to the circumstances of the adventure. For ex-
ample, if a merchant hires the characters to retrieve
Fortification Cost per Day
a family heirloom from a long-abandoned tower, Fortified outpost or watchtower 50GP
the merchant might give the deed to the tower as a Keep or small castle 100 GP
reward.
Large castle or fortress 400. GP
FORTIFICATIONS
A fortification is a reward usually given to seasoned LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION
adventurers who demonstrate unwavering fealty to A benefactor might provide adventurers with a let-
a powerful political figure or ruling body, such as a ter of recommendation rather than payment. Such a
monarch, a knighthood, ora council of wizards. A letter is usually enclosed in a handsome folio, case,
fortification can be anything from a fortress in the or scroll tube for safe transport, and it usually bears
heart of a city to a provincial keep on the border- the signature and seal of whoever wrote it.
lands. While the fortification is for the characters A letter of recommendation from a person of im-
to govern as they see fit, the land on which it sits peccable reputation can grant adventurers access
remains the property of the crown or local ruler. to NPCs whom they would otherwise have trouble
Should the characters prove disloyal or unworthy meeting, such as a duke, duchess, viceroy, or mon-
of the gift, they can be asked or forced to relinquish arch. Moreover, carrying such a recommendation
custody of the fortification. In that respect, the for- on one’s person establish a baseline of trust with
tification is different from the characters’ Bastions local authorities.
(described in chapter 8). However, you can also use

A letter of recommendation is worth only as much deal. A Neutral Good or Neutral NPC might pay off
as the reputation of the person who wrote it and of- favors to protect their reputation. A Chaotic Good
fers no benefit where its writer holds no sway. NPC is more concerned about doing right by the
adventurers, honoring any obligations without wor-
MEDALS rying too much about personal risk or adherence to
Although they are often fashioned from gold and the law.
other precious materials, medals have an even
greater symbolic value to those who award and re-
SpEcIAL RIGHTS
ceive them. Medals are typically awarded by politi- A politically powerful person can reward characters
cal figures for acts of heroism, and wearing a medal by giving them special rights, which might be artic
is usually enough to earn the respect of those who ulated in some sort of official document or procla-
understand its significance. mation. For example, characters might be granted
Different acts of heroism can warrant different special rights to attack pirate ships or other enemies
kinds of medals. The king of Breland (in the Eber- of the crown, to lead rites or ceremonies in a com-
ron setting) might award a Royal Badge of Valor munity, or to negotiate on a ruler's behalf. They
(shaped like a shield and made of ruby and elec might receive a lifetime of free room and board
trum) to adventurers for defending Brelish citizens. from the grateful citizens of a community or gain
The Golden Bear of Breland (a medal made of gold the sworn service of local soldiers to assist them as
and shaped in a likeness of a bear's head, with gems needed
for eyes) might be reserved for adventurers who Special rights last only as long as the legal docu-
prove their allegiance to the Brelish Crown. ment dictates, and such rights can be revoked if the
‘Amedal doesn't offer a specific in-game benefit adventurers abuse them.
to one who wears it, but it can affect dealings with
NPCs. For example, a character who displays the TITLES
Golden Bear of Breland is regarded as a hero of A politically powerful figure has the ability to dis-
the people within the kingdom of Breland. Outside pense titles. A title often comes with a parcel of
Breland, the medal carries far less weight, except land (see above). For example, a character might be
among allies of Breland’s king. awarded the title Earl of Stormriver or Countess of
Dun Fjord, along with a parcel of land that includes
PARCELS OF LAND a settlement or region ofthe same name. Archfey
A parcel of land usually comes with a letter from a are fond of granting whimsical (and alliterative)
local ruler, affirming that the land has been granted titles, such as Chancellor of Chocolates or Grand
as a reward for some service. Such land usually re- Duke of Giggles, which might come with minor
mains the property ofthe local ruler or ruling body supernatural gifts (see “Supernatural Gifts” in this
but is lent to a character with the understanding chapter) rather than land.
that it can be taken away, especially if the charac- ‘A character can hold more than one title, and in a
ter’s loyalty is ever called into question. feudal society, those titles can be passed down to (or
Characters who receive a parcel of land are free distributed among) one's children. A character who
to build on it and are expected to safeguard it. They holds a title is expected to act in a manner befitting
may yield the land as part of an inheritance, but that title. By decree, titles can be stripped away if
they can't sell or trade it without permission from the character fails to meet the obligations and re-
the local ruler or ruling body. Ifa character already sponsibilities that come with the title.
has a Bastion (see chapter 8), the parcel of land
might surround the Bastion or be close to it. TRAINING
Parcels of land make fine rewards for adventurers A character might be offered special training. This
who are looking for
a place to settle or who have kind of training isn't widely available and thus is
family or a personal investment in the region where highly desirable.
the land is located. The character must spend 30 days with the
trainer to receive a special benefit. Possible training
SPECIAL Favors benefits include the following:
A reward might be a favor the characters can call
+ The character gains proficiency in a skill.
on at some future date. Special favors work best
+ The character gains proficiency with a tool
when the individual granting them is trustworthy.
+ The character learns a language.
A Lawful Good or Lawful Neutral NPC will do
whatever can be done to fulfill an obligation when
the time comes, short of breaking laws. A Lawful
Evil NPC does the same, but only because a deal is a

CHAPTER 3|DM'S TOOLBOX 8

Moss of the area, then read down until you find its size.
Then check the rightmost column to see about
This section can help you speed up play when re-
how many creatures are caught in the area. If you
solving outcomes with large groups of monsters,
imagine that the targets are spread out, decrease
also known as mobs.
the number by 1d3. If they're bunched up, you can
Tips ” increase the number by 143. Of course, an area can't
encompass more creatures than are present in an
Follow these tips to smooth a combat encounter
encounter.
with a large number of monsters:
Your judgment always outweighs these guidelines,
Damage. Use the average damage specified ina and it's fine to err on the side of affecting more crea-
monster's stat block. tures. For example, if eight zombies are crowded
Hit Points. Ifa spell or attack reduces a monster around a Fighter when the Bard centers a Shatter
toa handful of Hit Points, assume the monster is spell on the Fighter's space, the spell’s area should
killed or otherwise taken out of the fight. definitely engulf all eight zombies, even though
Monster Mobs. Divide a large number of identical according to the table, a 10-foot-radius Sphere in-
monsters into smaller mobs and spread their turns cludes only three creatures.
‘out between the characters’ turns. Mobs of five to
eight identical creatures work well, but don’t have EXAMPLES
more mobs than there are characters. ‘The following scenario shows examples of how you
as the DM can apply the guidelines described in the
AVERAGE RESULTS a rest of this section,
‘Whenever you would otherwise make a number of Eight Zombies surround and attack a Fighter. The
D20 Tests for identical monsters, the Mob Results zombies’ attack bonus is +3, and the Fighter's AC is
table can help you determine the number of suc- 18, so the roll needed is 15 (18 - 3). Finding 15 in the
cessful D20 Tests the monsters get without having Normal column and reading across to the Out of
to roll dice. Follow these steps: 8 column, the DM gets a result of 2/8—two ofthe
zombies hit. Using the zombies’ average damage (4
Step 1. Determine the minimum d20 roll the mon-
Bludgeoning damage), the Fighter takes 8 Bludgeon-
sters need to succeed on the D20 Test using the
ing damage.
following formula:
After seeing the Fighter mauled by zombies, the
Roll needed = target number - monster's bonus Bard casts Shatter, centering the spell on the Fighter.
(The Bard trusts that the Fighter will succeed on
Step 2. Find the roll needed on the Mob Results
the Constitution saving throw and survive the re-
table. Ifall the monsters have Advantage on the
sulting damage.) The spell affects a 10-foot-radius
roll (for example, if they're attacking and have
Sphere, and the Targets in Area of Effect table
the Pack Tactics trait, or if they're making a
suggests that such an area should encompass three
saving throw against a spell and have the Magic
zombies. However, the DM decides that all eight
Resistance trait), find the roll needed in the With
zombies (and the Fighter) are affected. The zom-
Advantage column, If all the monsters have Dis-
bies' Constitution saving throw bonus is +3, and the
advantage (for example, if they're attackinga
Bard's spell saving throw DC is 16, so the roll needed
creature protected by the Blur spell), use the With
is 15 (16 - 3). Finding 13 in the Normal column and
Disadvantage column. Otherwise, use the Normal
reading across to the Out of 8 column, the DM gets
column.
a result of 3/8, so three of the zombies succeed on
Step 3. Read across the table to find a fractional
their saving throws.
number of successes you can easily apply to the
Seeing a larger crowd of zombies in the dis-
group of monsters. That's the fraction of monsters
tance, the Wizard casts Fireball. The spell covers a
that succeed on the D20 Test.
20-foot-radius Sphere. The Targets in Area of Effect
ADJUDICATING AREAS OF EFFECT table suggests that area covers ten zombies, but the
DM rules that they're densely packed together and
‘When the characters are fighting a large number of
adds 143, rolling a 2. So the spell engulfs twelve
monsters, it's not always practical to use miniatures
zombies in its area. The zombies’ Dexterity saving
ona battle grid or some other visual aid. So how
throw modifier is -2, and the Wizard's spell save DC
do you determine how many monsters are affected
is 16, so the roll needed is 18 (16 - [-2)). Finding 18 in
by the Wizard's Fireball spell or some other area of
the Normal column and reading across to the Out of,
effect?
6 column, the DM gets a result of 1/6. Twelve times
The Targets in Area of Effect table offers a guide-
1/6 is 2, so two of the twelve zombies succeed on
line. To use the table, find the column for the shape
the save,

82 CHAPTER 3 | DM’s TOOLBOX

Mos RESULTS
Roll Needed Number ofSucces:

with with
Normal Advantage Disadvantage Out of4 Outof5 Out of6 Out of. Out of 10
1 4 1 4/4 5/5 6/6 3/8 10/10

2 5-6 = 4/4 5/5 6/6 3/8 ro/10
3 78 a 4A 5/5 5/6 7/8 9/10

4 9 = 3/4 4s 5/6 7/8 9/10
5 10 3 3/4 4/5 5/6 6/8 8/10

6 n _ 3/4 4/5 5/6 6/8 8/10

7 2 4 3/4 4/5 4/6 68 710

8 B 5 3/4 3/5 46 5/8 7/10
9 4 = 24 3/5 4/6 5/8 6/10
10 —- 6 2/4 3/5 3/6 4/8 6/10
u 5 Z 24 3/5 3/6 4/8 5/10

2 16 = 26 2/5 3/6 48 5/10
B = 8 24 25 2/6 3/8 4p0
“4 W 9 vA 2/5 26 3/8 4p10
ary 8 10 A 2s 2/6 2/8 310
16 - n vA Ws 26 2/8 3/10
W 9 2 14 ys 6 2/8 2no

8 — B V4 ys 6 18 2/10

9 2 Ws 0 ys 6 18 yo
20 - 16-17 0 0 0 0 yo

TARGETS IN AREA OF EFFECT
———______—-Arrea Shape and Size ———_____________—_ Number of
Cone Cube Circular Line Trees
10-foot 5-to10-foot S-foot-radius = — 1
15-to20-foot —_15-foot = 30-foot-long, 5-foot-wide 2
25-foot = YO-foot-radius 30-footlong, 10-foot wide or 60-foot-long, 3
5-foot-wide
— 20-foot — 90- oF 100-foot-long, 5-foot-wide

30-foot = ee 60-foot-long, 10-foot-wide or 120-foot-long, 5
S-foot-wide
35-foot 25-foot 15-foot-radius = —
40-foot 30-foot = 90- oF 100-foot-long, 10-foot-wide
45-foot — _ = 9
50-foot 35-foot 20-foot-radius —120-foot-long, 10-foot-wide 10
55-foot 40-foot — _ 12
60-foot 45-foot 25-footradius — — 16
z 50-foot 30-footradius — 20
“Use this column for Cylinders, Emanations (using the sizeof the Emanation rather than its radius), and Spheres.

CHAPTERS |DM'STOOLBOX 83

NONPLAYER CHARACTERS NAME
Nonplayer characters (NPCs) are sup You'll need a name for any NPC who plays a prom-
porting char-
acters controlled by you, the inent role in your campaign. You can
DM. Examples include pick a given
the local innkeeper, the ge who lives in the tower name and a surname from any ofth
e accompanying
on the outskirts of town, and the death tables; a name can include options from different ta
knight out
to destroy the kingdom. bles. If you like, you can roll 1d6 to det
erm ine which
The Monster Manual contains stat blocks table to choose a name from, then roll
you can 1d12 to get
use to represent NPCs in you name. You can also alter
r game. You can add or combine names, pull
details to make them distinctive and mem from a book of names, or use a nam
orable. e inspired by a
For example, your players will have no movie or book.
trouble
membering the no-nonsense blacksmit
h with the Stat BLock
tattoo of the black rose on her right shoulder or the
Choose a stat block from the Monste
badly dressed musician with the bro r Manual to
ken nose, NPCs
represent the NPC's game statisti
in your game rarely need much cs. You don't need
more complexity
to do this if you don't expect the NPC to
than that. engage in
combat or use any special abilitie
s (such as casting
DETAILED NPCs spells). You can customize the
stat block using the
guidelines under “Creating
a Creature” in this
Flesh out NPCs who play prominent role chap-
s in your ter to better reflect the NPC you have
adventures. You can use the accompanying in mind.
NPC
‘Tracker to record information as ALIGNMENT
you determine
these six elements of your NPC: Choose the NPC's alignment, which
can help you
Name sketch the outlines of an NPC’s behavior
Alignment Appearance and per-
sonality. See the Player's Handbook and “Alignment
Stat Block Personality Secret
this chapter for more information.

CHAPTER
5 | DM’s To!

1: COMMON Names 4: Monosyitasic NAMES
1d12_ Common Given Name Common Surname Monosyllabic
1 Adrik Brightsun Surname

2 Alyn Dundragon 1 Chen Dench
3 Aurora Frostbeard 2 Creel Drog
4 Eldeth Garrick 3. Dain Dusk
5 Eldon Goodbarrel 4 Dorn Holg
6 Farris Greycastle 5 Flint Horn
7 Kathra Ironfist 6 Glim Imsh
8 Kellen Jaerin 7 Henk Jask
9 Lily Merryweather 8 Krusk Keth
10 Nissa Redthorn 9 Nox Ku
NW Xinii Stormriver 10 Nyx Kung
12 Zora Wren 1 Rukh Mott
12 Shan Quaal
2: GUTTURAL Names
Jd12_ Guttural Given Name Guttural Surname 5: Sinister NAMES:
1 Abzug Burska ‘d12_ Sinister Given Name Sinister Surname
2 Bajok Eruuthok 1 Arachne Doomwhisper
3° Bharash Hrondl 2 Ayss Dreadfield
4 Grovis Jarzzoke 3. Carrion Gallows
5 Gruuna Kraltus 4 Grinnus Hellstryke
6 Hokrun Shamog 5 Melkhis Killraven
7 Mardred Skrangval 6 —Morthos Nightblade
8 Rhogar Ungart 7 Nadir Norixius
9 Skuldark Uuthrakt 8 Scandal Shadowfang
10 Thokk Vrakir 9 Skellendyre Valtar
M1 Urzul Yuldra 10 Thaltus Winterspell
12 Varka Zulrax MW Valkora Xandros,

12. Vexander Zarkynzorn
3: Lyricat Names
1d12 Lyrical Given Name _Lyrical Surname 6: WHIMSICAL NAMES:
1 Arannis Arvannis Whimsical
2 Damaia
.
Brawnanvil
. 1d12_ Given Name Whimsical Surname

3 Darsis Daardendrian lames Bonen
4 Dweomer Drachedandion 2 Das Coldioy
Snes fer 3 Dimble Hoddypeak

6 jhessail Meliamne
: . 4 Ellywick Huddle

7 keyleth Mishann arse Hele
8 Netheria Silverfrond & Oracles Cneshoe
9 Orianna Snowmantle
=
rarer
7 Fonkin
ar
Scramblewise

10 Sorcyl Summerbreeze Sot Hig
T Umarion Thunderfoot .
10 Pumpkin Timbers
12 Velissa Zashir
1 Quarrel Underbough
12 Sybilwick Wimbly

CHAPTER S| DMS TOOLBOX 85

PERSONALITY
With the NPC's alignment and ability scores as
a starting point, use the guidelines in the Player's
Handbook to pick a few words that describe the
NPC's personality. You can choose or randomly de-
termine one personality trait associated with each
element of the NPC's alignment, or with the NPC's
highest and lowest ability scores, and combine them
to inspire a persona,
For example, if you find the adventurers unex-
pectedly arguing with a Lawful Neutral guard, you
might create a cooperative but laconic guard who
is happy to help the adventurers but speaks curtly,
hoping to end the conversation as quickly as possi
ble. Or, looking at the Imp stat block in the Player's
Handbook and noting its highest ability (Dexterity)
and its lowest (Strength), you might decide that the
little devil is fidgety and indirect, constantly on the
move and talking in circles to get to its point.

APPEARANCE
Briefly describe the NPC's most distinctive physical
features. You can start with the basics—skin, hair,
and eye colors, as well as the NPC's species. The
NPC Appearance table can also help you identify
one or two things that stand out about the charac-
ter’s appearance.

NPC APPEARANCE

1d12_ Feature
1 Distinctive jewelry

2 Flamboyant, outlandish, formal, or ragged
clothes
3. Uses an elegant mobility device (wheelchair,
brace, or cane)
wayvaus

Pronounced scar

Unusual eye color (or two different colors)

Tattoos or piercings
Birthmark

Unusua
hair color
l
Bald, or braided beard or hair
10 Distinctive nose (large, bulbous, angular,
small)
V1__ Distinctive posture (stooped or rigid)
12 Exceptionally beautiful or ugly

SECRET
Describe a secret the NPC is trying to hide or pro-
tect. The NPC Secrets table provides several ideas.

86 CHAPTER
3 | DM's TOOLBOX

(___ NPC TRACKER
NPC NAME:

STAT BLOCK: «MMM PAGE:

STAT BLOCK ALTERATIONS

PERSONALITY

APPEARANCE

—SEGRET

NPC Secrets
NPCs as PARTY MEMBERS
1d10 Secret
NPCs might join the adventuring party because
1 The NPCis in disguise, concealing their they want a share of the loot and are willing to
identity or some aspect of their appearance. accept an equal share of the risk, or they might fol-

2 The NPCis currently planning, executing, or low the adventurers because of a bond of loyalty,
covering up a crime.
gratitude, or love. You can delegate decisions about
an NPC's actions to one of the players, especially in
3. The NPC (or their family) has been threat-
combat, but you can override the player's decisions
ened with harm unless the NPC does
to reflect the NPC’s motivations.
something.
When you choose a stat block from the Monster
4 The NPC is under a magical compulsion Manual for an NPC party member, make sure the
(perhaps a Geas spell or some kind of curse) NPC doesn't overshadow the player characters. Use
to behave in a certain way. a stat block whose Challenge Rating is no higher
than half the characters’ level. These NPCs don't
The NPCs seriously ill or in terrible pain.
amass Experience Points and don't become more
6 The NPC feels responsible for someone's
powerful,
death or ill fortune. Here are some NPC archetypes that work well as
The NPC is on the brink of financial ruin. supporting characters in an adventuring party:

The NPC is desperately lonely or harboring Comic Relief. A comic relief NPC helps lighten the
an unrequited passion, mood of an adventure or game session, perhaps
9 The NPC nursesa powerful ambition. with an occasional display ofineptness or a gift
for puns.
10 The NPC is deeply dissatisfied or unhappy.
Curmudgeon. A curmudgeon NPC is quick to com-
plain humorously about the characters’ terrible
RecuRRING NPCs
choices and bad planning. You can occasionally
NPCs who keep showing up over the course ofa use this NPC to suggest legitimate courses of ac-
‘campaign build the sense that the world of the game tion or share insights.
isa living, breathing place. Whether these NPCs are Dutiful Assistant. A dutiful assistant NPC is good
allies, patrons, friends, or villains, they can deepen at carrying equipment and looking after the par-
players' investment in the world.
ty’s horses and other belongings. Such an NPC
You can use different stat blocks in the Monster
;ht be entirely devoted to their duty, or they
Manual, perhaps with some tweaks, to reflect the
;ht be using this easily overlooked position to
same NPC at different times as they grow over the pursue goals of their own.
course of a campaign. For example, characters on Milquetoast Healer. Absent a healer of their own,
their very first adventure might face a villain who the characters might love an NPC healer whose
uses the stat block ofa Mage Apprentice, only to personality matters less than the healer’s devotion
have that villain escape and return many adven-
to the party and ability to cast Cure Wounds or Re-
tures later to haunt them as a Mage. Still later, the vivify when needed.
same villain might reappear as an Archmage. Of Walking Textbook. A walking textbook NPC is
course, the trick here is making sure that the vil- knowledgeable about a particular field of exper-
lain survives from one adventure to the next, or at tise and can be a useful source of information, but
least coming up with a plausible way for the villain they can't be relied on to make wise decisions or
to return from death. After all, death is rarely the hold up their end in battle.
final word for adventurers, so it needn't be for their Wallflower Warrior. A wallflower warrior NPC
opponents.
is good at fading into the background, doesn’t
usually chat or engage unless approached, and ea-
Don’r Go OversoarD gerly avoids the spotlight. Their primary purpose
Developing nonplayer characters can be fun. That is to give monsters another target to attack.
said, use your time wisely. Beware of writing three
Even useful NPCs can slow down the game or over-
ages of backstory for an NPC whose interactions
stay their welcome. Consider having NPC party
with the adventurers will be over in three min-
members stick around for no more than a few
utes. The advice in this section is meant to help game
sessions or a single adventure before making
you create an their
interesting character quickly while
exit. NPCs can benefit from time away from the
providing just enough detail.
characters now and then,

CHAPTER 5 | DM’S TOOLBOX

HEROES, NikoFinst JOINED SHEILA, DiaNa,

Ezic, ANO Presto As An NPC weALen,

Loyatty example, given a magic weapon as a gift) or rescued
Loyalty is an optional rule you can use to determine by another party member. An NPC's Loyalty Score
ow far an NPC party member will go to protect
or can never be raised above its maximum.
assist the characters (even those the NPC doesn't When other party members act in a manner that
particularly like). An NPC party member who is runs counter to the NPC's alignment or personality,
abused or ignored is likely to abandon or betray the reduce the NPC's Loyalty Score by Id4. Reduce the
party, whereas an NPC who owes a life debt to the NPC's Loyalty Score by 2d4 if the NPC is abused,
characters 01 their goals might fight to the misled, or endangered by other party members for
death for them. You can simply decide on an NPC's purely selfish reasons. A Loyalty Score can never
loyalty, or you can track a Loyalty Score using the drop below 0.
following ru Meaning of Loyalty. An NPC with a Loyalty Score
Loyalty Score. An NPC's loyalty is measured on a of 10 or higher risks anything to help fellow party
numerical scale from 0 to 20. The NPC's max members. An NPC whose Loyalty Score is between
Loyalty Score is equal to the highest Charisma 1and 10 is tenuously faithful to the party. An NPC
score among all adventurers in the party, and its whose Loyalty Score drops to 0 no longer acts in
starting Loyalty Score is half that number. If the the party's best interests. The disloyal NPC either
highest Charisma score changes—perhaps a char leaves the party (attacking characters who attempt
act
dies or
erleaves the group—adju
the NPC's
st to intervene) or works in secret to bring about the
Loyalty Score accordingly. party's downfall
Tracking Loyalty. Keep track of an NPC's Loyalty Crew Loyalty and Mutiny. If the characters own or
re in secret so that the players won't know f operate a sailing ship or similar vessel, you can use
sure whether an NPC party member is loyal or these rules to track the loyalty of individual crew
disloyal. members or the ship's crew as a whole. If at least
An NPC's Loyalty S ‘ore increases by 1d4 other half the crew's Loyalty Scores drop to 0 during a
party members help the NPC achieve a personal voyage, the crew turns Hostile and stages a mutiny.
goal. Likewise, an NPC’s Loyalty Score increases If the ship is berthed, disloyal crew members leave
by 1d4 if the NPC is treated p: well (for the ship and never return.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX
89

ZaRax apeuics Poison
PURCHASING POISON
In some settings, laws prohibit the possession and
use of poison, but an illicit dealer or unscrupulous
apothecary might keep a hidden stash. Characters
with criminal contacts might be able to acquire poi-
son easily. Other characters might have to make ex-
tensive inquiries and pay bribes before they acquire
the poison they seek.

HARVESTING POISON
A character can attempt to harvest poison from a
venomous creature that is dead or has the Incapac-
itated condition. The effort takes 1d6 minutes, after
which the character makes a DC 20 Intelligence
(Nature) check using a Poisoner’s Kit. On a success-
ful check, the character harvests enough poison
for a single dose, and no additional poison can be
harvested from that creature. Ona failed check,
the character is unable to extract any poison. If the
character fails the check by 5 or more, the character
is subjected to the creature’s poison.

SAMPLE PoIsONs
Example poisons are detailed here in alphabetical
order. Each poison's description includes the sug-
gested price for a single dose ofthe poison, its type
(contact, ingested, inhaled, or injury), and a descrip-

POISON tion of the poison's debilitating effects.

Given their insidious and deadly nature, poisons are
a favorite tool among assassins and evil creatures. Assassin's BLoop (150 GP)
Poisons come in the following four types: Ingested Poison
Contact. Contact poison can be smeared on an A creature subjected to Assassin's Blood makes a
object and remains potent until it is touched or DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save,
washed off. A creature that touches contact poi- the creature takes 6 (Id12) Poison damage and has
son with exposed skin suffers its effects. the Poisoned condition for 24 hours. On a success-
Ingested. A creature must swallow an entire dose ful save, the creature takes half
asmuch damage
of ingested poison to suffer its effects. The dose only.
can be delivered in food or a liquid. You may de-
cide that a partial dose has a reduced effect, such
as allowing Advantage on the saving throw or Burnt Ornur Fumes (500 GP)
dealing only half as much damage on a failed save. Inhaled Poison
Inhaled. Poisonous powders and gases take effect
A creature subjected to Burnt Othur Fumes must
when inhaled. Blowing the powder or releasing
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or
the gas subjects creatures in a 5-foot Cube to its
take 10 (3d6) Poison damage, and it must repeat the
effect. The resulting cloud dissipates immediately
save at the start of each of its turns. On each suc-
afterward. Holding one’s breath is ineffective
cessive failed save, the creature takes 3 (1d6) Poison
against inhaled poisons, as they affect nasal mem-
damage. After three successful saves, the poison
branes, tear ducts, and other parts of the body.
ends.
Injury. Injury poison can be applied as a Bonus
Action to a weapon, a piece of ammunition, or
imilar object. The poison remains potent until CarRION CRAWLER Mucus (200 GP)
delivered through a wound or washed off. A crea-
Contact Poison
ture that takes Piercing or Slashing damage from
A creature subjected to Carrion Crawler Mucus
an object coated with the poison is exposed to its
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw
effects,

go CHAPTER 3 | DM’s TOOLBOX

or have the Poisoned condition for 1 minute. The
creature also has the Paralyzed condition while
Pate Tincture (250 GP)
Poisoned in this way. The creature repeats the save
Ingested Poison
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself
on a success. A creature subjected to Pale Tincture must succeed
‘ona DC 16 Constitution saving throw or take 3
(16) Poison damage and have the Poisoned condi-
ESSENCE OF ETHER (300 GP) tion, The Poisoned creature repeats the save every

Inhaled Poison 24 hours, taking 3 (1d6) Poison damage on a failed
save. The damage the poison deals can’t be healed
A creature subjected to Essence of Ether must suc-
by any means while the creature remains Poisoned.
ceed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have
After seven successful saves against the poison, the
the Poisoned condition for 8 hours. The creature
creature is no longer Poisoned.
also has the Unconscious condition while Poisoned
in this way. The creature wakes up if it takes dam-
age or if another creature takes an action to shake
PurpLe Worm Poison (2,000 GP)
it awake.
Injury Poison

A creature subjected to Purple Worm Poison makes
Loxtn’s Stine (200 GP) a DC 21 Constitution saving throw, taking 35 (1046)
Injury Poison Poison damage on a failed save or half
as much
damage on a successful one.
A creature subjected to Lolth’s Sting must succeed
‘ona DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the
Poisoned condition for 1 hour. If the creature fails
SERPENT VENOM (200 GP)
the save by 5 or more, the creature also has the Un-
Injury Poison
conscious condition while Poisoned in this way. The
creature wakes up if it takes damage or if another A creature subjected to Serpent Venom must suc-
ceed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking
creature takes an action to shake it awake.
10 (3d6) Poison damage on a failed save or half
as
much damage on a successful one.
MALICE (250 GP)
Inhaled Poison
Torpor (600 GP)
A ccreature subjected to Malice must succeed on a
Ingested Poison
DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Poi-
A creature subjected to Torpor poison must succeed
soned condition for 1 hour. The creature also has
the Blinded condition while Poisoned in this way. on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the
Poisoned condition for 4d6 hours. The creature's
Speed is halved while the creature is Poisoned in
Mrpnicut Tgars (1,500 GP) this way.
Ingested Poison

A creature that ingests Midnight Tears suffers no TruTH Serum (150 GP)
effect until the stroke of midnight. Any effect that
Ingested Poison
ends the Poisoned condition neutralizes this poi-
A creature subjected to Truth Serum must succeed
son. If the poison hasn't been neutralized before
midnight, the creature makes a DC 17 Constitution ona DC Il Constitution saving throw or have the
Poisoned condition for1 hour. The Poisoned crea-
saving throw, taking 31 (9d6) Poison damage on a
ture can't knowingly communicate a lie.
failed save or half
as much damage on a successful
one.

Wyvern Porson (1,200 GP)
On. oF Tacerr (400 GP) Injury Poison

Contact Poison A creature subjected to Wyvern Poison makes a DC

A creature subjected to Oil of Taggit must succeed
14 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (746) Poi-
son damage ona failed save or half
asmuch damage
ona DC 13 Constitution saving throw or have the
‘ona successful one.
Poisoned condition for 24 hours. The creature also
has the Unconscious condition while Poisoned in
this way. It wakes up if it takes damage.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX or

RENOWN RANK

Renown is an optional rule you can use to track Some groups have hierarchies that characters can
characters’ standing, individually or as a party, ascend as they improve their Renown Scores. Other

within a particular group, such as a faction, an or- groups have positions of honor that characters can
ganization, or a community. apply for if their Renown Score is high enough.

A character's or party's Renown Score starts at 0, Characters can earn promotions as their Renown

then Scores increase. You can establish certain Renown
increases as characters earn favor and reputa-
tion with respect to the group. You can tie benefits Score thresholds as prerequisites (though not nec-

toa character's renown, including ranks, titles, and essarily the only prerequisites) for advancing in

access to resources.
rank. You can set these thresholds however you
like, creating ranks and titles for the groups in your
Players track renown separately for each group
campaign.
their characters are associated with. For example,
an adventurer might have a Renown Score of 5 with
Perks
one faction and a Renown Score of 20 with another,
Earning renown within a group might come with
based on the character's interaction with each
certain benefits. A character with a Renown Score
group.
of 3+ might gain access to a reliable contact, a safe
You can use renown over the course of an entire
house, or a discount on adventuring gear. With a
campaign or within a single adventure. Ata cam-
Renown Score of 10, a character might gain access
paign scale, you might set up factions or guilds that
to Potions and Scrolls, the ability to call in a favor,
characters can join, individually or as a group, and
or backup on dangerous missions. A character
the characters pursue ranks and rewards by gaining
whose Renown Score rises to 50 might be able to
Renown within their organizations. At an adven-
call on a small army, acquire a Rare magic item, gain
ture level, you might decide that the characters as
access to a helpful spellcaster, or assign special mis-
a group need to earn a Renown Score of 5+ with
sions to members of lower status,
the council before the council trusts the characters
enough to share resources with them, Losinc RENOWN
GAINING RENOWN Disagreements with members of a group aren't,
enough to cause a loss of renown within that group.
At your discretion, a character or party can in-
However, serious offenses committed against the
crease their renown in the following ways:
group or its members can result in a loss of renown
Completing Missions. Advancing a group's inter- and rank within the organization. The extent ofthe
ests increases a character's Renown Score within loss depends on the infraction and is left to your dis-
that group by 1. Completing a mission specifically cretion. A character’s Renown Score with a group
assigned by that group or that directly benefits can never drop below 0.
the group increases the character's Renown Score
by 2. Hugely significant quests might grant Re- LEVEL-BASED RENOWN
nown Score increases of 5 or
4 at once. If you want to use the benefits of renown without
Group Involvement. Once a character has estab- tracking Renown Scores, you can use a character's
lished a Renown Score of I+ with a group, the level as a shorthand for the character's Renown
character can gain renown by spending time Score with a group, assuming the character has
between adventures undertaking minor tasks for worked with or for that group for most of the char-
the group and socializing with its members. After acter’s career. The Level-Based Renown table shows
doing so for a number of days equal to 10 times equivalencies between Renown Score and character
the character's current Renown Score, the charac- level.
ter’s Renown Score increases by 1.
LeveL-BASED RENOWN
BENEFITS OF RENOWN
Renown Score Character Level
Use these guidelines when determining the benefits
1 1
of increasing renown.
3 3
RECOGNITION
10 5
A character who has a Renown Score of
3+ with a
group is a respected member of that group. Other 25 n
members of the group are Friendly toward the 50 v7
character by default and provide the character with
lodging and food in dire circumstances.

92 CHAPTER 3 | DM’s TOOLBOX

SETTLEMENTS
Your campaign world is likely to include settlements
DEFINING TRAITS
that characters can visit. The characters might even 120 Trait
adopt one ofthese settlements as a home base, in or 1-2 Fortified outer wall
near which they can build their Bastions when they
344 Lots of gardens, parks, and greenery
are of high enough level to do so (see chapter 8).
The Settlements by Size table provides population 5-6 Lots of mud, filth, and litter
ranges for villages, towns, and cities as well as the 73 Sprawling cemetery
value of the most expensive item the settlement is
9-10 Lingering fog
likely to have for sale. Adjust these numbers as you
wish to account for special circumstances. For ex- n-12 Noise and smoke from smithies and forges
ample, a Potion of Healing (which costs 50 GP) is too B Canals and bridges
expensive an item to purchase in most villages, but
“4 Cliffs on one or more sides
a village that happens to have an alchemist, an herb-
alist, or a potion brewer might have one or more 15-16 Clean streets and well-maintained buildings
such potions for sale. 7-18 Ancient ruins within the settlement

19-20 Impressive structure (such as a keep, tem-
SETTLEMENTS BY SIZE
ple, circle ofstanding stones, or ziggurat)
Settlement Population Range Max. GP Value

Village Up to 500 20GP
Do I Nee A SETTLEMENT Map?
Town 501-5,000 2,000 GP
A settlement doesn’t always require a map. Sim-
City 5,001 and higher 200,000 GP ply describing the settlement to your players is
usually sufficient. But ifit’s important for the
players to know where certain buildings or other
SETTLEMENT TABLES AND TRACKER
locations are in the settlement, having a map is
The following tables allow you to flesh out details helpful.
about a settlement. You can use the accompanying For an example of
a settlement map, see the
Settlement Tracker to record important informa- Crossroads Village map in appendix B.
tion about a village, town, or city in your campaign. ~

CHAPTER 3| DMS TOOLBOX 9

CLAIMS TO FAME Tavern NAMEs*
1d20_ Claim to Fame 1d20_ Claim to Fame 1420. First Part Second Part

1
KHAN Delicious food 11 Piety 1 The Golden lyre

Rude people 12 Gambling 2 The Silver Dolphin

Friendly folk 13. Godlessness 3 The Beardless Dwarf

Artists or writers 14 Education 4 The Laughing Pegasus

Great hero/savior 15. Wines 5 The Dancing Hut

Flowers 16 High fashion 6 The Gilded Rose

Seasonal festival 17 Political intrigue
Cou

7 The Stumbling Stag
Hauntings 18 Powerful guilds 8 The Wolf and Duck
Spellcasters 19 Patriotism 9 The Fallen Lamb
10 Decadence 20 Ancient ruins 10 The Leering Demon
n ‘The Drunken Goat
Current CALAMITIES 12 The Wine and Spirit
1d12_ Calamity 13 The Roaring Horde
1 Monsters infest the settlement. 14 The Frowning Jester
2 Akkey figure died; murder is suspected. 15 The Barrel and Bucket
5 War brews between rival guilds or gangs. 16 The Thirsty Crow
4 A plague or famine sparks riots. 17 The Wandering Satyr
5 Monsters attack anyone who approaches or 18 The Barking Dog
leaves the settlement.
19 The Happy Spider
wwiva

Trade disputes cause economic hardship.
20 The Witch and Dragon
Anatural disaster threatens the settlement.
"Roll a separate d20 for each part ofthe tavern’s name.
A prophecy of doom has residents on edge.

Locals are being drafted to fight in a war. RANDOM SHops

10 Political or religious strife threatens violence. 1420 Type 1420 Type

n The settlement is under siege. 1 Pawnshop 1 Smithy

2 Scandal threatens powerful local families. 2 Apothecary 12 Carpenter

3 Grocer 13. Weaver

Locat Leapers 4 Delicatessen 14 Jeweler

‘1d12_ Leader 5 Potter 15 Baker

1 Respected, fair, and just leader or council 6 Undertaker 16 Mapmaker

Feared tyrant 7 Bookstore 7 Tailor
anunwn

Coward manipulated by others 8 — Moneylender 18 — Ropemaker

9 Armorer 19 Mason
legitimate leader causing civil unrest
10 Chandler 20 Scribe
Powerful monster

Mysterious, anonymous conspirators

Contested leadership (with open fighting)
er

Acrimonious council unable to make
decisions

Doltish lout

10 Dying leader (with disputed succession)

n Iron-willed and respected leader or council

2 ligious leader or council

94 CHAPTER 3 | D's TOOLBOX

(___ SETTLEMENT TRACKER
SETTLEMENT NAME:

O VILLAGE (por. uP To 500) © TOWN (Pop. 501-s,000) O CITY (pop. 5,001+)

DEFINING TRAIT

(CLAIM TO FAME \

CURRENT CALAMITY

NOTEWORTHY PEOPLE NOTEWORTHY PLACES

GP VALUE OF THE MOST EXPENSIVE ITEM FOR SALE:

SIEGE EQUIPMENT
Keo Launewen
Siege equipment includes objects designed to assail
castles and other walled fortifications. Most siege
‘weapons require creatures to move them, as well as
to load, aim, and fire them.

BALLISTA
Large Object
Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 50
Ballista Bolt (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged Attack
Roll: +6, range 120/480 ft. Hit: 16 (3d10) Piercing
damage.

A Ballista is a massive crossbow that fires heavy
bolts. Loading a Ballista requires the Utilize action,
and aiming it requires another Utilize action. Then
a crew member can take the Ballista Bolt action.

CANNON
Large Object

Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 75
Cannonball (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged Attack
Roll: +6, range 600/2,400 ft. Hit: 44 (8d10) Blud-
geoning damage.

‘A Cannon uses gunpowder or arcane power to pro-
pel heavy iron balls at destructive speeds. A Cannon
is usually attached to a wooden frame with wheels.
Loading a Cannon requires the Utilize action, and
aiming it requires another Utilize action. Then a
crew member can take the Cannonball action. Kec LAUNCHER
Large Object

Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 30
FLAMETHROWER CoacH Toxic Keg (Requires Load and Aim). Constitution Sav-
Large Object ing Throw: DC 15, each creature in a 20-foot-radius

Armor Class: 19 Sphere centered on a point 30 to 300 feet from the
Flamethrower. Dexterity Saving Throw: DC 15, each launcher. Failure: 14 (4d6) Poison damage. Success:
creature in a 60-foot-long, 5-foot-wide Line. Failure: Half damage.
14 (4d6) Fire damage, and the creature starts burn-
A back-mounted, wooden catapult flings small kegs
ing. Success: Half damage only.
of toxic gas. Loading a Keg Launcher requires the
Powered by magic, this iron coach has a flame- Utilize action, and aiming it requires another Utilize
thrower turret mounted atop it. action. Then a crew member can take the Toxic Keg
‘The coach can accommodate up to two Medium action.
creatures. An iron hatch in the vehicle's underbelly
grants access. Narrow slits in the front, sides, and
back of the coach allow its occupants to see outside. LIGHTNING CANNON
A creature in the coach has Three-Quarters Cover Medium Object
against attacks and other effects that originate out- ‘Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 30
side it. Lightning Ball (Requires Aim). Ranged Attack Roll: +6,
‘The coach is designed for a crew of two: a driver range 300/1,200 ft. Hit: 22 (4d10) Lightning dam-
and a gunner. The driver can take the Utilize action age.
to move and turn the coach, which has a Speed of
A Lightning Cannon is a small, bronze cannon in-
30 feet, using levers and pedals inside. The gunner
laid with arcane runes and mounted on a heavy tri-
can use the Flamethrower action to aim and fire it.
pod device. It launches balls of crackling electricity.

96 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

Aiming a Lightning Cannon requires the Utilize it can be tipped

action, then a crew member can take the Lightning easily, spilling its contents. Once emptied, a caul-
Ball action. dron must be refilled before it can be used again.
Filling the cauldron requires three Utilize actions.
‘Then a crew member can take the Spill action.
MANGONEL Cauldrons are typically filled with boiling oil but
Large Object can be filled with other substances, such as acid or
green slime (see “Hazards” in this chapter), with dif
Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 100
ferent effects.
Mangonel Stone (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged
Attack Roll: +5, range 200/800 ft. (can't hit targets
within 60 feet of itself). Hit: 27 (5410) Bludgeoning
‘TREBUCHET
damage.
Huge Object
A Mangonel is a catapult that hurls heavy projec ‘Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 150
tiles in a high arc, so it can hit targets behind walls. Trebuchet Stone (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged
Loading a Mangonel requires two Utilize actions, Attack Roll: +5, range 300/1,200 ft. (can’t hit targets
and aiming it requires two more Utilize actions. within 60 feet ofitself). Hit: 44 (8d10) Bludgeoning
Then a crew member can take the Mangonel Stone damage.
action.
A Trebuchet is a catapult that throws its payload in
ahigh arc so it can hit targets behind walls. Load-
Ram ing a Trebuchet requires two Utilize actions, and
Large Object aiming it requires two more Utilize actions. Then a
crew member can take the Trebuchet Stone action.
‘Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 100
Ram (Requires Position). Melee Attack Roll: +8, reach
ft. Hit: 16 (3d10) Bludgeoning damage.

A Ram consists ofa movable gallery equipped with
a heavy log suspended from two roof beams by
chains. The log is shod in iron and used to batter
through doors and barricades. Positioning a Ram
requires three Utilize actions. Then a crew member
can use the Ram action.
‘The gallery roof gives the operators Total Cover
against attacks and other effects from above.

Srece Tower
Gargantuan Object

Armor Class: 15 Hit Point 200

A Siege Tower is a mobile wooden structure with
a beam frame and slats in its walls. Large wooden
wheels or rollers allow the tower to be pushed or
pulled by soldiers or beasts of burden. Medium or
smaller creatures can use the Siege Tower to reach
the top of walls up to 40 feet high. A creature in the
tower has Total Cover against attacks and other ef-
fects that originate outside it.

SusPENDED CAULDRON
Large Object

Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 20 Manconee
Spill (Requires a Full Cauldron). Dexterity Saving
Throw: DC 15, each creature in a 10-foot square
directly below the cauldron. Failure: 10 (346) Fire
damage. Success: Half damage.

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX 97

SUPERNATURAL GIFTS ight give a Blessing for a particular purpose,
such as recovering a holy person's remains or top-
A supernatural gift is a special reward granted by a
pling a tyrannical empire, and could revoke the
being or force of great magical power. Supernatural
Blessing if a character fails to pursue that purp
gifts come in two forms: ose
or acts counter to it.
Blessing. A Blessing is usually bestowed by a god or A character retains the benefit of a Blessing
a godlike being. forever or until itis taken away by the being who
Charm. A Charm is usually the work of a powerful granted it.
spirit, a magical location, or a mythic creature. There is no limit on the numb
of Bles
er sings a
Unlike a magic item, a supernatural gift isn’t an character can receive, but it should be rare fora
object and doesn't require Attunement. character to have more than one at a time. Mor
e-
over, a character can't benefit from multiple in-
BLESSINGS stances of a Blessing
at the same time. For example,
a character can't benefit from two instance
A character might receive a Blessing from a deity s of the
Blessing of Health at once.
for doing something truly momentous—an accom-
You can easily create more Blessings by mim
plishment that catches the attention of both gods ick-
and mortals. A Blessing is an appropriate rewa ing the properties ofaWondrous Item.
rd for
one ofthe following accomplishments:

+ Restoring
a god's most sacred shrine BLESSING OF HEALTH
+ Foiling an apocalyptic plot by a god's enemies Supernatural Gift (Blessing)
+ Helping a god's favored servant complete a quest
Your Constitution score increases by 2, up to a
An adventurer might also receive a Blessing in maximum of 22.
ad-
vance of a perilous quest. For example, a Paladin
could receive one before setting out on a ques
t to
slay a terrifying lich that is responsible for a magi BLESSING OF Macic RESISTANCE
-
cal plague sweeping the land. Supernatural Gift Blessing)
A character should receive a Blessing only if itis You have Advantage on saving throws against spell
s
useful to that character, and some Blessings com and other magical effects.
e
with expectations on the part of the benefactor.
A

98 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

BLESSING OF PROTECTION CHARM OF ANIMAL CONJURING
Supernatural Gift (Blessing) ‘Supernatural Gift (Charm)

You gain a +1 bonus to AC and saving throws. ‘This Charm allows you to cast Conjure Animals.
Once used three times, the Charm vanishes from
you.
BLESSING OF UNDERSTANDING
Supernatural Gift (Blessing)
Your Wisdom score increases by 2, up to a maxi-
CHARM OF DaRKVISION
mum of 22. Supernatural Gift (Charm)
This Charm allows you to cast Darkvision. Once
used three times, the Charm vanishes from you.
BLESSING OF VALHALLA
Supernatural Gift (Blessing)
This Blessing grants you the power to summon
CHARM OF FEATHER FALLING
spirit warriors, as if you are blowing a silver Horn of Supernatural Gift (Charm)
Valhalla. Once you use this Blessing, you can't use it This Charm grants you the benefits of a Ring of
again until 7 days have passed. Feather Falling. ‘These benefits last for 10 days, after
which the Charm vanishes from you.

BLESSING OF WEAPON ENHANCEMENT
Supernatural Gift (Blessing) CHARM OF HEROISM
Supernatural Gift (Charm)
‘One nonmagical weapon in your possession be~
comes a +I Weapon while you wield it. ‘This Charm allows you to give yourself the benefit
of a Potion of Heroism as a Magic action. Once you
do so, the Charm vanishes from you.
BLESSING OF WOUND CLOSURE
Supernatural Gift Blessing)

This Blessing grants you the benefits of a Periapt of
CHARM OF RESTORATION
Wound Closure. Supernatural Gift (Charm)
This Charm has 3 charges. You can expend some
CHARMS of its charges to cast one of the following spells:
Charms can be received in many different ways. For Greater Restoration (2 charges) or Lesser Restoration
example, a Wizard who finds an eldritch secret in (A charge). Once all its charges have been expended,
2 dead archmage's spellbook might be infused with the Charm vanishes from you.
the magic ofa Charm, as might a character who
solves a sphinx’s riddle or drinks from a magical
fountain. Mythic creatures sometimes grace their CHARM OF THE SLAYER
allies with Charms, and some explorers find them- Supernatural Gift (Charm)
selves bearing a Charm after discovering a long-lost One weapon in your possession becomes a Dragon
location drenched in primeval magic. Slayer or Giant Slayer (DM's choice) for the next 9
Some Charms can be used only once; others can days. The Charm then vanishes from you, and the
be used a specific number oftimes before vanishing. ‘weapon returns to normal.
Ifa Charm lets a character cast a spell, the char-
acter can do so without expending a spell slot or
providing
any spell components. Unless otherwise CHARM OF VITALITY
stated, the spell uses its normal casting time, range, Supernatural Gift (Charm)
and duration; if the spell requires Concentration, This Charm allows you to give yourself the benefit
the character must concentrate. of a Potion of Vitality as a Magic action. Once you do
‘A Charm can’t be removed from a creature by
so, the Charm vanishes from you.
anything short of divine intervention or a Wis
spell. A character can't benefit from multiple in-
stances ofa Charm at the same time.
A typical Charm mimics the effects of a Potion
or spell, so itis easy to create more Charms of your
own.

CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX 99

TRAPS damage on a failed save or half
asmuch damage on
a successful one. Rubble from the collapse turns the
‘Traps should be used sparingly, lest they lose their
trapped area into Difficult Terrain.
charm. A hidden pit can be a fun surprise, but too
Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature
many traps in an adventure can lead players to be-
can examine the trapped area and make a DC 11
come overly cautious, which slows down the game.
Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the trip wire
The best traps are fleeting distractions that skilled
and the unstable section of ceiling on a successful
characters can overcome in a short amount of time
check. Once detected, the trip wire can be easily cut
or deadly puzzles that require quick thinking and
or avoided (no ability check required).
teamwork to overcome. Traps that are undetectable
At Higher Levels, You can scale the trap for higher
and inescapable are rarely fun.
levels by increasing the damage and the save DC, as

PARTS OF A TRAP shown in the following table.

The description of a trap includes the following Levels Bludgeoning Damage Save DC
parts after the trap’s name: 540 22 (4d10) 15

Severity and Levels. A trap is designated as a 116 55 (10d10) v
nuisance or as deadly for characters of certain
7-20 99 (18410) 19
levels. A nuisance trap is unlikely to seriously
harm characters of the indicated levels, whereas a
deadly trap can grievously damage characters of
FALLinc Net
the indicated levels.
‘Nuisance Trap (Levels 1-4)
gger. Traps are often set to go off when a crea-
ture enters an area or touches an object. Examples Trigger: A creature crosses a trip wire
of triggers include stepping on a pressure plate, Duration: Instantaneous

crossing a trip wire, turning a doorknob, or using A falling net trap uses a trip wire to release a
the wrong key in a lock. ted, 10-foot-square Net suspended from the
Duration. Some traps have durations expressed in
ceiling. The trip wire is 3 inches off the ground and
rounds, minutes, or hours. Others specify that
stretches between two columns or trees.
their effects last until the trap is destroyed or The first creature that crosses the trip wire
dispelled. Ifa trap's duration is instantaneous, its causes the Net to fall on it. The target must succeed
effect is resolved instantly. Ifa trap resets after ona DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or have the
activating, that fact is noted in this entry. A trap is
Restrained condition until it escapes. The target
otherwise inert after activation. succeeds automatically if it's Huge or larger. A crea-
Use caution when introducing a trap to characters ture can take an action to make a DC 10 Strength
of
a level lower than the trap's level range. A trap (Athletics) check, freeing itself
or another creature
that is a nuisance at one level range could be deadly within its reach from the Net on a successful check.
to characters of a lower level range Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature
‘can examine the trapped area and make a DC 11
EXAMPLE TRAPS Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the trip wire

Traps are presented in alphabetical order. and the suspended Net on a successful check. Once
detected, the trip wire can be easily cut or avoided
(no ability check required).
COLLAPSING ROOF Destroy the Net. Reducing the Net to 0 Hit Points

Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4) frees any creature trapped in it (see the Player's
Handbook for the Net's statistics).
Trigger: A creature crosses a trip wire
Set the Trap. A creature that has Thieves Tools
Duration: Instantaneous
and all the trap's components (including a Net) can
This trap uses a trip wire to collapse an unstable try to set a falling net trap, doing so with a success-
section of ceiling, The trip wire is 3 inches off the ful DC 13 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check, Each
ground and stretches between two weak supports attempt to set this trap takes 10 minutes.
that topple when the trip wire is pulled. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher
The first creature that crosses the trip wire causes levels by increasing the weight of the Net, which
the supports to topple and the unstable section of increases the save DC and the DC of the Strength
ceiling to collapse. Each creature beneath the unsta- (Athletics) check as follows: DC 12 at levels 5-10,
ble section of ceiling must succeed on a DC 13 Dex- DC 14 at levels 11-16, or DC 16 at levels 17-20.
terity saving throw, taking 11 (2d10) Bludgeoning
{

100 CHAPTER 3 | DM's TOOLBOX

check, detecting the pit on a successful check.
F1rE-CASTING STATUE Once the pit is detected, an Iron Spike or a similar
Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4) object can be wedged between the pit’s lid and the
surrounding floor to prevent the lid from opening,
Trigger: A creature moves onto a pressure plate
thereby making it safe to cross. The cover can also
Duration: Instantaneous, and the trap resets at the
be held shut using Arcane Lock or similar magic.
start ofthe next turn
Escape. A creature needs a Climb Speed, climbing
When a creature moves onto this trap's pressure gear, or magic such as Spider Climb to scale the pit's
plate for the first time on a turn or starts its turn smooth walls. You can make the pit easier to escape
there, a nearby statue exhales a 15-foot Cone of by adding cracks in the walls big enough to serve as
magical flame. The statue can look like anything, handholds and footholds.
such as a dragon or a wizard. Each creature in the ‘At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher
Cone must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving levels by increasing the pit’s depth and damage, as
throw, taking 11 (2d10) Fire damage on a failed save shown in the following table.
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Levels Depth _Bludgeoning Damage
Detect and Disarm. A Detect Magic spell reveals
5410 30 feet 10 (346)
an aura of Evocation magic around the statue. As a
Search action, a creature within 5 feet of the statue 1-16 60 feet 21 (6d)
can examine it and make a DC 10 Wisdom (Percep-
17-20 120 feet 42 (1246)
tion) check, detecting a tiny glyph on the statue
ona successful check. Once the glyph is found, a
character can take a Study action to examine it and
PorsoneD Darts
make a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check, ascer-
Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4)
taining that the glyph means “fire” on a successful
check. As an action, a character can use a sharp tool Trigger: A creature moves onto a pressure plate

to deface the glyph, which disarms the trap. Duration: instantaneous, and the trap resets at the
Asa Search action, a creature can examine the start of the next turn if it has activated fewer than
section of floor that forms the pressure plate and three times

make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting When a creature moves onto this trap's pressure
the pressure plate on a successful check. Wedging plate for the first time on a turn, poisoned darts
an Iron Spike or similar object under the pressure shoot from tubes embedded in the surrounding
plate prevents the trap from triggering. walls. The holes that house these tubes are ob-
At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher scured by dust and cobwebs or skillfully hidden
levels by increasing the damage and the area of ef- amid bas-reliefs, murals, or frescoes.
fect, as shown in the following table. Each creature in the darts’ path must succeed on
Levels Fire Damage Area of Effect a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or be struck by 143
darts, taking 3 (1d6) Poison damage per dart.
510 22 (4d10) —_30-foot Cone
Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature
1-16 ——$5(10d10)_—60-foot Cone can examine the walls and make a DC 15 Wisdom
17-20 99(18d10)_—-120-foot Cone (Perception) check, detecting the holes on a success-
ful check. Plugging all the holes with wax, cloth, or
detritus prevents the darts from firing.
Hippen Pir ‘Asa Search action, a creature can examine the
Nuisance Trap (Levels 1-4) section of floor that forms the pressure plate and
make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting
Trigger: A creature moves onto the pit’s id
the pressure plate on a successful check. Wedging
Duration: Instantaneous
an Iron Spike or a similar object under the pressure
This 10-foot-deep pit has a hinged lid constructed plate prevents the trap from triggering.
from material identical to the surrounding floor. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher
When a creature moves onto the lid, it swings open levels by increasing each dart’s Poison damage as
like a trapdoor, causing the creature to fall into the follows: 7 (2d6) at levels 5-10, 14 (4d6) at levels,
The lid remains open thereafter. 11-16, o 24 (746) at levels 17-20.
A creature that falls into the pit takes 3 (1d6)
Bludgeoning damage from the fall.
Detect and Disarm. As a Study action, a creature
can examine the section of floor that forms the pit’s
lid and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation)

CHAPTER 3|DM’STOOLBOX IT

Boasy ano Hani eanety Avoio a

At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for
higher
PorsoNED NEEDLE levels
by increasin
the
g damage and the save DC, as
Nuisance Trap (Levels shown in the following table.
‘Trigger: A creature opens the trap’s lock improper Levels
ly or Poison Damage Save DC
fails to disarm the trap
s410 11 (2di0) 3
Duration: instantaneous
n-16 22 (4d10) 5
A poisoned needle is hidden in a lock. When a crea-
17-20 55 (10d10) V7
ture opens the lock with any object other than the
proper Key, the needle springs out and stabs the
creature. The creature makes a DC II Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 5 ROLLING STONE
(1d10) Poison damage and has the Poisoned Deadly Trap (Levels 11-16) or Nuisance Trap (Levels
condi-
tion for I hour. On a successful save, the creature 17-20)

takes half
asmuch damage only Trigger:
A creature moves onto a pressure plate
Avoid. The trap doesn't trigger if the lock is Duration: Until the stone stops rolling
opened using a Knock spell or similar magic.
When a creature moves onto a hidden pres
Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature sure
plate, a 5-foot-radius orb of solid stone is released
can examine the trapped lock and make a DC 15
secret compartment and begins to roll. The
Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the needle
stone and all creatures nearby roll Initiative; the
ona successful check. Once the trap is detected, a
stone get
a +8
s bonus
on its Initiative roll.
character can take an action to try to disarm the
On its turn, the stone moves 60 feet in one direc-
trap, doinso
g with a successful DC 15 Dext erity
, changing course if redirected by an obstacle.
(Sleight of Hand) check. On a failed check, the crea-
‘The stone can move through creatures’ spaces,
ture triggers the trap.
and creatures can move through the stone's
space,

CHAPTER 3 | DM’s TOOLBOX

treating it as Difficult Terrain. Whenever the stone A creature that falls into the pit lands at the bot-
enters a creature's space for the first time on a turn tom and takes 3 (1d6) Bludgeoning damage from the
ora creature enters the stone's space while the fall plus 9 (248) Piercing damage from the spikes.
Detect and Disarm. As a Study action, a creature
stone is rolling, that creature must succeed on a DC
15 Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (10d10) Blud- can examine the section of floor that forms the pit's
geoning damage and have the Prone condition. lid and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation)
‘The stone stops when it hits a wall or similar check, detecting the pit on a successful check. Once
barrier. It can't go around corners, but creative dun- the hidden pit is detected, an Iron Spike or a similar
geon builders incorporate curving turns into nearby object can be wedged between the pit's lid and the
passages that allow the stone to keep moving. surrounding floor to prevent the lid from opening,
Detect and Disarm. As a Study action, a creature thereby making it safe to cross. The cover can also
can examine the section offloor that forms the be held shut using an Arcane Lock spell or similar
pressure plate and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Inves- magic.
Escape. A creature needs a Climb Speed, climbing
tigation) check, deducing the pressure plate's func- «gear, or magic such as a Spider Climb spell to scale
tion on a successful check. Wedging an Iron Spike
ora similar object under the pressure plate prevents the pit's smooth walls. You can make the pit easier
the trap from triggering.
to escape by adding cracks in the walls big enough
Destroy the Stone. The stone is a Large object that to serve as handholds and footholds.
has AC 17, HP 100, a Damage Threshold of 10, and ‘At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher
Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage.
levels by increasing the pit's depth and damage, as
shown in the following table.
Slow the Stone. As an action, a creature can try to
slow down the stone with a DC 20 Strength (Ath- Levels Pit Depth Damage
letics) check. If the check is successful, the distance 5-10 30feet_ 10 (346) Bludgeoning plus
the stone moves on its turn is reduced by 15 feet. If 13 (3d8) Piercing
that distance drops to 0, it stops moving and is no ng
longer a threat.
16 60 feet_—_21 (6d6) Bludgeoniplus
36 (8d8) Piercing

17-20 120 feet 42 (12d6) Bludgeoning plus
SprKep Pit 57 (13d8) Piercing
Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4)
‘Trigger: A creature moves onto the pit's lid BUILDING YOUR OWN TRAPS
Duration: Instantaneous When designing your own traps, use the Build-
‘A10-foot-deep pit has a hinged lid constructed from ing a Trap table to determine an appropriate total
‘material identical to the surrounding floor. When amount of damage for the trap to deal based on its
a creature moves onto the lid, it swings open like a level and severity. If the trap also applies a con¢
trapdoor, causing the creature to fall into the pit, tion, consider reducing the damage.
which has sharpened wooden or metal spikes at the If the trap requires an attack roll or allows a sav-
bottom. The lid remains open thereafter. ing throw, use the appropriate columns on the table
to determine the attack bonus or an appropriate
save DC.

BUILDING A TRAP
Nuisance Traps Deadly Traps
Save DC Damage Attack Bonus Save DC Damage
Levels Attack Bonus 11 (2d10)
1-4 +4 10-12 5 (1d10) +8 13-15
+4 12-14 11 (2410) +8 15-17 22 (adi0)
5-10 w9 55 (10d10)
1-16 +4 14-16 22 (4d10) +8
7-20 +4 16-18 55 (10d10) +8 19-21 99 (18d10)

CHAPTER 3 | DM’S TOOLBOX — 103

CHAPTER 4

CREATING ADVENTURES

W adventures or using published ones, this
HETHER YOU'RE CREATING YOUR OWN defeat that villain. Otherwise, players can feel as if
they've been railroaded—set onto a course that has
chapter helps you create fun and memo- only one destination or outcome, no matter how
rable experiences for your players. hard they try to change it.
Creating an adventure involves blending scenes You might find it helpful to think about an adven-
of exploration, social interaction, and combat into a ture not as a narrative that arcs from beginning
unified whole that meets the needs of your players to end with little chance for deviation, but more in
and your campaign. The basic elements of good terms of situations that you are presenting to the
storytelling should guide you throughout this pro- characters. The adventure unfolds organically from
cess, joining the encounters into a coherent story. the players’ responses to the situations you present.

STEP-BY-STEP ADVENTURES ADVENTURE PREMISE
Follow these steps to create an adventure: One way to start brainstorming an adventure is to
imagine a situation that might pique the characters’
Step 1: Lay Out the Premise. Determine the situ-
interest. For some D&D players, a rumor ofa dun-
n or conflict that underscores the adventure.
geon filled with treasure is enough of a premise to
Also think about the adventure’s setting and what
launch an adventure. A brewing warbetween two
is unique and fun about it.
small nations, the death of a leader and the acces-
Step 2: Draw In the Players. Think about how the
sion of
a new one, a migration of dangerous mon-
characters will get drawn into the situation you've
sters, the appearance of a comet, and the opening
established, Consider how the adventure might tie
ofa portal to another plane of existence are other
with the characters’ goals.
situations that could lead to adventure.
Step 3: Plan Encounters. Determine the encoun-
A simple premise might also boil down to “a magic
ters or events that take the characters from the
item that the characters want is hidden away in a
beginning of the adventure to the end. dungeon.” Browsing the magic items in chapter 7
Step 4: Bring It to an End. How do you expect the
can inspire you to create a simple adventure seed.
adventure will end? Think about possible endings
as well as rewards for the characters. USING PusLisHeD ADVENTURES
The rest of this chapter offers inspiration and ad- A published adventure includes a pregenerated
vice for each of these four steps. scenario with the maps, NPCs, monsters, and
treasures you need to run it. This allows you to
Lay OUT THE PREMISE focus your preparation time on plot develop-
An adventure shares many of the features of a ‘ments that arise from the characters’ actions.
novel, a movie, an issue of a comic, or an episode of You can adjust a published adventure so it

2 TV show. Comic series and serialized TV dramas better suits your campaign and appeals to your
are particularly good comparisons because of the players. For example, you can replace the villain
way individual adventures are limited in scope but of an adventure with one the players have already
blend together (to some degree) to create a larger encountered in your campaign, or add details
narrative. If an adventure is a single episode or sea- from your campaign setting so the adventure
son of a series, a campaign is the series as a whole. involves your players’ characters in ways that the
But while it’s worthwhile to compare an adven- adventure’s designer never could have imagined.

ture to these other forms of storytelling, remember Published adventures also provide inspiration
shat an adventure isn't a complete story until you for your own adventures. You can even take a part
stay it. Your players are coauthors of the story with of
an adventure and incorporate it into a differ-

‘you, and the events of the story shouldn't be pre- ent one. For example, you might use a map ofa
determined; the actions ofthe players’ characters temple but repopulate it with monsters of your
Save to matter. For example, if a major villain shows choice, or you might use a chase sequence as a
=p before the end of the adventure, the adventure model for a pursuit scene in your campaign.

sSould allow for the possibility that the heroes

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 105

Guibe RAits AND RAILROADS ADVENTURE SITUATIONS BY LEVEL
Players need to feel like they're in control of their
Use the tables in this section to inspire adventure
characters, the choices they make matter, and
ideas for characters of different levels, with the
what they do has some effect on the outcome of
range of possible levels grouped into four tiers. You
the adventure and on the game world. Keep that.
can roll on the tables and see if the result sparks
in mind as you're planning adventures. If your
your imagination or read the entries on the tables
adventure relies on certain events, plan for multi-
until you find something that grabs you.
ple ways they might come about, or be prepared
for clever players to prevent those events from Levers 1-4: Loca: HEROES
happening as you expect, Otherwise, your players The fate of a village might depend on the abilities
might end up feeling railroaded, of fledgling adventurers. These characters navigate
On the flip side, players sometimes willfully dangerous terrain and explore haunted crypts,
disregard the adventure hooks you put in front of where they might fight ferocious wolves, giant spi-
them and go entirely off the rails. See “Respect ders, evil cultists, flesh-eating ghouls, and ruthless
for the DM” in chapter 1 and “Draw In the Play- brigands,
ers” later in this chapter for advice about dealing
with this situation. Levets 5-10: HEROES OF THE REALM
‘One way to give players impactful choices is to At this tier, characters undertake adventures that
keep multiple adventure possibilities available to might determine the fate of a region. These adven-
them at the same time. If the characters have two turers venture into fearsome wilds and ancient
or three things they can investigate or pursue, ruins, where they confront giants, hydras, golems,
they have a meaningful choice. And if whatever devils, demons, and mind flayers. They might also
threads they don't investigate turn into bigger face a young dragon that has just established a lair.
problems, you've clearly demonstrated that their
Levers 11-16; MASTERS OF THE REALM
decisions matter.
The fate of a nation or even the world depends on
the characters at this tier. These adventurers ex-
ADVENTURE CONFLICT plore uncharted regions and delve into forgotten
A premise can be a good starting point, but before dungeons, where the characters confront terrible
you can turn it into an adventure, it needs a conflict schemers of the Lower Planes, cunning rakshasas
‘worthy ofthe heroes’ attention. The conflict might and beholders, and hungry purple worms, They
be driven by a single villain or monster, a villain might encounter and even defeat a powerful adult
with lackeys, an assortment of monsters, or an evil dragon. At this tier, they broker peace between
organization. But it need not involve the forces of nations or lead them into war, and their formidable
evil it could be a rivalry or disagreement between reputations attract the attention of powerful foes.
two families, organizations, or nations; a looming
natural (or magical) disaster; or even conflict within Levets 17-20: MasTErs OF THE WORLD
the adventuring party about how to pursue the At this tier, adventures have far-reaching conse-
quences, possibly determining the fate of millions
characters’ goals.
Given a premise of a dungeon filled with treasure, on the Material Plane and even places beyond.

what conflict awaits the characters when they enter Characters traverse otherworldly realms and ex-

the dungeon? That might be as simple as “ho: plore demiplanes and other extraplanar locales,

monsters want to eat the characters” or “two rival where they fight terrible balor demons, titans, arch-

factions of monsters inhabit the dungeon.” It might devils, iches, ancient dragons, and even manifesta-

also involve a rival or a villain hoping to plunder the tions of the gods.
dungeon first, a rumbling volcano threatening to
erupt and bury the dungeon, or two rival families Writinc For YoursELF
claiming ownership of the treasure left behind in When you're preparing an adventure to run for
the dungeon by their ancestors, your friends, you don't need to write hundreds
If you're stuck, browse through the Monster Man- of pages describing each location in exhaustive
ual until you find a monster that inspires you. detail. You can run a game with no more written
notes than you'll find in one of the short adven-
tures at the end ofthis chapter.

106 CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

LevELs 1-4 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS
LEVELS 5-10 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS
1420 Situation 1420. Situation
1 Adragon wyrmling has gathered a band of
1 Agroup of cultists has summoned a demon
kobolds to help it amass a hoard.
to wreak havoc in the city.
2 Wererats living in a city's sewers plot to take 2 Arebel lures monsters to the cause with the
control of the governing council promise of looting the king's treasury.
3. Bandit activity signals efforts to revive an evil
3 Anevil Artifact has transformed a forest into
cult long ago driven from the region.
a dismal swamp full of horrific monsters,
4 Apack of gnolls is rampaging dangerously
4 An Aberration living in the Underdark sends
close to local farmlands.
minions to capture people from the surface
5 Arivalry between two merchant families esca- to turn those people into new minions.
lates from mischief
to mayhem. 5 Amonster (perhaps a devil, slaad, or hag) is
6 Anew sinkhole has revealed a long-buried impersonating a prominent noble to throw
dungeon thought to hold treasure. the realm into civil war.
7 Miners discovered an underground ruin and A master thief plans to steal royal regalia
were captured by monsters living there. A golem intended to serve as a protector has
8 An innocent person is being framed for the gone berserk and captured its creator.
crimes ofa shape-shifting monster. 8 Aconspiracy of spies, assassins, and necro-
9 Ghouls are venturing out ofthe catacombs at mancers schemes to overthrow a ruler.
night. 9 After establishing a lair, a young dragon is
10 Anotorious criminal hides from the law in an trying to earn the fear and respect ofother
old ruin or abandoned mine. creatures living nearby,
11 Acontagion in a forest is causing spiders to. 10 The approach of
a lone giant alarms the peo-
grow massive and become aggressive. ple ofa town, but the giant is simply looking
12 To take revenge against a village for an imag- for a place to live in peace.
ined slight, a necromancer has been animat- 11_ An enormous monster on display in a menag-
ing the corpses in the village cemetery. erie breaks free and goes on a rampage.
13. Anevil cult is spreading in a village. Those 12 Acoven of hags steals cherished memories
who oppose the cult are marked for sacrifice. from travelers.
14 An abandoned house on the edge of town is, 13 Avillain seeks powerful magic in an ancient
haunted by Undead because ofa cursed item ruin, hoping to use it to conquer the region.
in the house. 14 Asscheming aristocrat hosts a masquerade
15 Creatures from the Feywild enter the world ball, which many guests see as an opportu-
and cause mischief
and misfortune among nity to advance their own agendas. At least
villagers and their livestock. ‘one shape-shifting monster also attends.
16 Ahag’s curse is making animals unusually 15. A ship carrying a valuable treasure or an evil
aggressive, Artifact sinks in a storm or monster attack.
17 Bullies have appointed themselves the village 16 Anatural disaster was actually caused by
and are extorting money and food magic gone awry or a cult’s villainous plans.
from villagers. 17 Asecretive cult uses spies to heighten ten-
18 After a local fisher pulls a grotesque statue sions between two rival nations, hoping
to
from the sea, aquatic monsters start attack- provoke a war that will weaken both.
ing the waterfront at night. 18 _ Rebels or forces of an enemy nation have kid-
19 The ruins on the hill near the village lie under napped an important noble.
a curse, so people don’t go there—except a 19. The descendants ofa displaced people want
scholar who wants to study the to reclaim their ancestral city, which is now
20 Anew captain has taken charge of a band of inhabited by monsters.
pirates or bandits and started raiding more
20. Arenowned group of adventurers never re-
frequently. turned from an expedition to a famous ruin,

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

LeveLs 11-16 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS
LEVELS 17-20 ADVENTURE SITUATION
S
1d12_ Situation
1d10 Situation
A portal to the Abyss opens in a cursed
loca- 1 ‘An ancient dragon is scheming to destroy a
tion and spews demons into the worl
d. god and take the god's place in the pantheon,
A band of hunting giants has driven its The dragon's minions are searching for
Arti-
prey—enormous beasts—into facts that can summon and weaken this god
pastureland

‘An adult dragon’s laiis
r transforming an A band of giants drove away a metallic dra
gon
expanse into an environment inhospit and took over the dragon's lair, and the
able to
the other creatures living there. dragon wants to reclaim the lair
A long-lost journal describes an inc
redibl e ‘An ancient hero returns from the dead to
journey to a hidden subterranean realm full of Prepare the world for the return of an equally
magical wonders. ancient monster.

Cultists hope to persuade a dragon to un- ‘An ancient Artifact has the power to defeat or
dergo the rite that will transform it
into a imprison a rampaging titan,

dracolich.
A god of agriculture is angry, causing
rivers to
The ruler ofthe realm is sending an emi
ssary dry up and crops to wither.
to a hostile neighbor to negotiate
a truce, and An Artifact belonging to a god falls into
the emissary needs protection.
mortal hands,
A castle or city has been drawn into ano
ther A titan imprisoned in the Underdark begins
plane ofexistence.
to break free, causing terrible earthq
uakes
Astorm tears across the land, with a mysteri- that are only a hint of the destruction that
the
ous flying citadel in the eye of the storm. titan will cause if it is released.
Two parts ofamagic item are in the hands of Allich tries to exterminate any spellcasters
bitter enemies; the third piece is lost. that approach the lich’s level of power.
10 Evil cultists gather from around the world
to Abooly temple was built around
a portal lead.
summon a monstrous god or alie ing to one of the Lower Planes to preven
n entity.
t any
n A tyrannical ruler outlaws the use of magic evil from passing through in either directio
n.
without official sanction. A secret society Now the temple has come under sie
of ge from
spellcasters seeks to oust the tyrant. both directions,
2 During a drought, low water levels in a lake 10 Five ancient metallic dragons laiin
r the Pillars.
reveal previously unknown ancient ruin ofCreation. ifall these dragons are killed,
s that the
contain a powerful evil world will collapse into chaos. One has
just
been slain.

108 CHAPTER
4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

ADVENTURE SETTING If they leave by the secret door to the southeast,
you check the map and follow the secret tunnel as it
Many D&D adventures revolve dungeons—interior
winds to the hidden vaults below the great hall.
spaces such as great halls and tombs, subterranean
Sample Maps. Appendix B contains maps you can
monster lairs, mazes riddled with traps, natural cav-
use for your adventures or as inspiration for your
ens extending for miles beneath the surface, and
‘own maps. You can also modify those maps to fit
ruined castles. The “Dungeons” section in chapter
the details of the location you have in mind.
3 can help you craft a dungeon environment for an
Map Inspiration. The internet is a great place to
adventure.
find adventure maps that have been made avail-
Of course, not every adventure takes place in a
able, as well as real-world building floor plans and
dungeon. A wilderness trek across the desert or a
city maps and other images that can inspire your
harrowing journey into the jungle can be an excit-
mapmaking.
ing adventure in its own right. Outdoors, dragons
wheel across the sky in search of prey, fierce war- BRINGING A LOCATION TO LIFE
riors pour forth from grim fortresses to wage war An inhabited adventure location has its own ecosys-
against their neighbors, ogres and trolls plunder tem, The creatures that live there need to eat, drink,
farmsteads for food, and monstrous spiders drop breathe, and sleep. Predators need prey, and intel-
from web-shrouded trees. ligent creatures search for lairs offering the best
Adventures can also take place in cities, towns, combination of air, food, water, and security. Keep
and villages, which are often no less dangerous than these factors in mind when designing an adventure
dungeons or the wilds. The “Settlements” section in location. If the site has an internal logic, adven-
chapter 3 can help you create a settlement where an turers can use their understanding of that logic to
adventure can take place. make informed decisions.
For example, characters who find a pool of fresh
ADVENTURE MAPS
water in a dungeon might infer that many of the
An adventure location almost always benefits from
creatures inhabiting the dungeon come to that spot
a map, and the more thoughtfully constructed the
to drink. The adventurers might set an ambush at
map is, the more fun players are likely to have as
the pool. Likewise, closed or locked doors can re-
their characters explore the location.
strict the movement of some creatures. A dungeon
Maps and Adventure Structure. An adventure map
infested with carrion crawlers or stirges would need
can take many forms—from a detailed dungeon
open passages so that these creatures can move
map that shows the dimensions and contents of ev-
about to find food.
ery room to a rough outline of how one encounter
might lead to another, depending on the route the ADVENTURE INHABITANTS
characters choose. Whatever form your map takes, The monsters in any adventure location are more
it functions as a flowchart since each decision point than a collection of random creatures that happen
(a branch in a corridor, a room with multiple exits) to live near one another. Fungi, natural animals,
leads to new decision points. If the characters leave scavengers, and predators can coexist in a complex
a room by the north door, you check your map and ecology, alongside sapient creatures who share liv-
determine it leads them into the great hall, lined ing space through some combination of negotiation
with pillars, where the fire giant king holds court. and domination.

‘ComMON Map Symsots

raFueoe

|B fal exl| ©
Sansa Seger Te
au

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 109

Each creature's entry in the Monster Manual indi
cates the terrain types where that creature is mc
Draw IN THE PLAYERS
often found, and that book also includes tables li Ifan adventure situation directly affects the c
ing the creatures commonly found within each type acte
or the rs
people and places they care about, that
ofterrain. Using that information, you can decide is often enough motivation for the characters to get
which creatures inhabit an adventure location involved. (However, see “Respect for the Players” in
with
a particu
in lar environmYou
ent.can choose chapter I for advice about harming the people and
a
range ofcreatures, from common vermin to sapient places characters love.)
inhabitants ng predators, and d i If the adventure situation doesn't have an obvious
how they live together. impact
on the characor
terthe s people
or things
Factions. Particularly in larger areas, g they care about, you can use other techniques to
draw in the players. These are best tailored to the
groups consist of sapient
« motivations of your players and their characters
.
abound for the adventurewho
rs enter those ar- For example, some adventuring groups are noble
eas. Characters might ally with one group or play heroes who respond without hesitation to the pleas
groups against each other to reduce the threat of innocent villagers cryi
forng
help; other groups
the more powerful mor For example, in a dun- arehardened mercenaries who respon only dto of
geon inhabited by mind flayers and the grimlocks fers of payment. Some groups are devoted to god
they rule, the adventurers might try to incite the rulers, or other patrons who might send them on
gtimlocks to revolt against the mind layers quests, either directly or through intermediaries.
Bring the NF de
of rs
groups to life as de-
scribed in the “Nonplayer Characte1 NTURE PATRONS
section in
chapter 3, fleshing out their personalities and
g Many adventures begin with a patron
Then use those elements to decide how those lead- characters to undertake a quest o
ers respond to adventurers, eward in exchange for this
e the time to flesh out an NPC
v serves as a
patron. Once in a while, it can be interesting for
the

characters’ patron to betray them, Pulling that trick SUPERNATURAL Hooks
snore than once in a campaign, though, is likely to
Celestial omens, vivid dreams, or other magical
make the players unwilling to trust any future pa-
phenomena can p characters to the adventure
trons and possibly suspicious about any adventure
situation and suggest a course of action. The Super-
books you put in front of them.
natural Hooks table offers some suggestions.
The Patron Hooks table offers some suggestions
for ways a patron can lead characters to an adven-
SupPernaTurat Hooks
ture situation. The “Campaign Start” section in
chapter 5 offers some more suggestions for patrons, 1d6_ Hook
1 The characters all have a vivid dream that.
PaTRON Hooks foreshadows elements ofthe adventure.
1d6 Hook 2 While preparing spells, one character rec
1 Atown crier announces that someone is a quest from a god or patron.
hoping to hire adventurers. 3. A fortune teller’s reading for one ofthe
2 Someone the characters want to impress or characters points to a quest and offers hints
need a favor from asks them to deal with the about challenges that lie ahead.

adventure situation 4 Flames, clouds, smoke, or huge flocks of
3 When the characters arrive in a new city, they birds take distinct shapes that portend the
find a job board where someone has posted adventure situation.
in search of adventurers. 5 Animals or animated objects speak clearly to
4 Awealthy patron who is aware of the adven- direct the adventurers toward the situation.

turers’ accomplishments writes to them, 6 Someone who died returns as a ghost and
offering to pay them for their talents. haunts the characters. The ghost prompts
5 Acitizen in need, who has learned ofthe the characters to investigate the cause ofthe
adventurers’ accomplishments and kindness, ghost’s death and put itto rest.
travels miles to find them and implore them
for help. HAPPENSTANCE Hooks
6 The adventurers are arrested (on valid or Sometimes, characters just happen on an adventure
invented charges) and offered a chance to through sheer coincidence—or at least what appears
escape puriishiment by:compieiiigaquest: to be coincidence (which might actually involve
divine or other supernatural intervention). The
SEES Happenstance Hooks table provides some ideas.

As you populate your world with interesting HapPENsTANCE Hooks
supporting characters, consider the following: de Hgek

Avoiding Stereotypes. Show how multiple people 1 The characters find a letter describing the
from the same culture are different. Don’t use a adventure situation,
real-world accent in a disparaging way.
Beautiful Diversity’ Faature members of diferent 2. The characters are on an unrelated quest,
genders, ethnicities, and sexualities, as well as such as searching for a particular magic item,
people with varied capabilities, beliefs, roles, that leads them into the adventure situation.
professions, interests, and outlooks. 3 The adventure situation disrupts a festival or
Fresh Spin. Whenever possible, put a fresh spin ceremony that the characters are attending.
op Uamallantrobe Ie rysterious eure wheof
presents adventurers with a quest on behalf
4 Amagical mishap places the characters in the
etre ltuiton
the king might be the king in disguise. The wiz- i
ard in the tower might be a projected illusion 5 While traveling in a caravan or aboard a ship,
created by a band of thieves to guard their loot. the characters befriend an NPC who has
Relatability. Treat NPCs as real people with real news about the adventure situation.
motivations. Put yourself.in their shoes. What 6 The characters are attacked after being mis-
would you do? taken for another group of adventurers. They
learn about the adventure situation from a
clue left behind by their attackers.

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES mr

PLAN ENCOUNTERS RUN A GAUNTLET
‘The adventurers must pass through a dangerous
Encounters are the individual scenes in the larger
area. As with retrieving an object, reaching the exit
story of your adventure. Reduced to fundamentals,
is a higher priority than killing opponents in the
an encounter is an objective with an obstacle. It
area. A time limit adds a complication, as does a de-
accomplishes one or more ofthe following:
cision point that might lead characters astray. This
+ Moving characters closer to achievinga goal might be an exploration encounter, with traps and
+ Frustrating the characters’ progress toward a goal hazards as complications, or a combat encounter
+ Revealing
new information against Hostile monsters.

CHARACTER OBJECTIVES SNEAK IN
The following objectives can be foundations for ‘The adventurers need to move through the encoun-

encounters. Although these objectives focus on a ter area without their enemies noticing. This is typi-
single encounter during an adventure, using the cally an exploration encounter, but if the characters

same objective in multiple encounters allows you to are detected, a combat encounter or social interac-

combine these encounters into a larger obstacle or tion might result.

problem the adventurers must overcome.
Stop A RiTuaL
Make PEACE The plots of evil cult leaders, malevolent spellcast-

The characters must convince two opposing groups ers, and Fiends often involve rituals that must be

(or their leaders) to end the conflict that embroils foiled. In a combat encounter, characters might
them. As a complication, the characters might have have to fight their way through evil minions before
‘enemies on one or both of the opposing sides, or attempting to disrupt the ritual’s magic. This could
some other group or individual might be instigating also drive an exploration encounter, where the

the conflict to further its own ends. An encounter challenge is getting to the place where the ritual is
aimed at making peace might involve only social occurring, or a social interaction encounter, where

interaction, perhaps with the threat of combat if ne- the objective is convincing the ritual leaders to

gotiations go poorly. It could also begin as a combat stop their rite. As a complication, the ritual might
encounter, with the characters trying to stop the be close to completion when the characters arrive,
imposing
a time limit. The ritual's completion might
fighting and get the parties talking to each other.
have immediate consequences, too.
Protect AN NPC or Opyject
TaKE OUT A SINGLE TARGET
‘The characters must act as bodyguards or protect
some object in their custody. As a complication, an A villain the characters seek to defeat is surrounded
NPC under the party's protection might be cursed, by minions powerful enough to kill the adventurers.

panicked, unable to fight, or apt to risk the lives of The characters can flee and hope to confront the
villain another day, or they can try to fight their
the adventurers through dubious decisions. The
object the adventurers have sworn to protect might way through the minions. As a complication, the

be sentient, cursed, or difficult to transport. Such minions might be innocent creatures under the

an encounter might be a combat encounter or an villain’s control. Killing the villain means breaking
exploration encounter, with either Hostile monsters that control, but the adventurers must endure the
ora dangerous environment threatening the NPC minions’ attacks until the villain falls.
or object the characters are trying to protect. If the
KEEPING THE ADVENTURE MOVING
characters are protecting an NPC, this objective can
add an element ofsocial interaction to a combat or Make sure your players have clear objectives they
exploration encounter. can pursue at every stage of the adventure. Three
simple techniques can ensure that the players un-
RETRIEVE AN OnjECT derstand the task at hand and how to pursue it:
‘The adventurers must gain possession of a specific
Adviser NPCs. A helpful NPC in a social interaction
object in the area of the encounter, often with a
can offer advice and suggestions to the characters.
time limit. This might be a combat encounter, with
Such an NPC might be the patron who initially
monsters protecting the object, or an exploration
sent the characters on the adventure, someone
encounter, with traps or hazards preventing access
they met along the way, or a character's contact.
to the object. As a complication, enemies might de-
When you're planning an adventure, include
sire the object as much as the adventurers do, add-
NPCs who can fill this role.
inga combat element to an exploration encounter
or complicating a combat.

m2 CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

Gouin aaioens oneoane

4
“it

Evil Intrusion. If things start grinding to a halt, appeal to a wide breadth of players. But an
have the characters encounter a minion or mon- ture you create for your home camg
ster connected to the adventure’s main threat. At have to appeal to every possible player inte
the end of the encounter, perhaps the characters only to the players at your table.
find information that gets them back on tra You can design encounters that appeal to multi-
Plan oneor two encounters like this ahead of ple player motivations. Imagine a fight pitting the
me. characters against a gang of gnolls, delighting the
‘The DM's Role. If the characters can't figure out players who enjoy fighting. Then a young dragon
how to solve an encounter or aren’t sure what wanders into the middle of the fight. Suddenly the
to do next, you can remind the players of things fight can swing one of two ways: the dragon could
their characters have already learned or call for help the gnolls against the party or help the party
Intelligence (Investigation) or similar checks to against the gnolls. It's up to the players who thrive
see if their characters can remember and connect on acting to persuade the dragon to help the party.
things that the players might be missing.
MULTIPLE Ways TO PROGRESS
SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE
Make sure there are multiple ways the characters
‘can progress through the adventure at any point, so
2, players have different tastes in the activ- ifthey
miss one way, they have an alternative. Plan
ities they enjoy in the game. An adventure needs to opportunities for the adventure to move d
account for the different players and characters in even when the characters fail. Use challenges with a
our group to draw them into the story. single path
to success only as chances
for the char-
An adventure that includes a balance of explo- acters to obtain extra reward:
ration, social interaction, and combat is likely to

CHAPTER + ATING ADVENTURES 113,

COMBAT ENCOUNTERS _
The following features can make a combat encoun-
ter more interesting or challenging:

Changes in Elevation. Terrain features that pro-
vide a change of elevation (such as stacks of
empty crates, ledges, and balconies) reward clever
positioning and encourage characters to jump,
climb, fly, or teleport.
Defensive Positions. Enemies in hard-to-reach
locations or defensive positions force characters
who normally attack at range to move around.
Hazards. The “Hazards” section in chapter 3 de-
scribes dangerous features, such as patches of
green slime, that characters or their enemies can
use to their advantage.
Mixed Monster Groups. When different types of
monsters work together, they can combine their
abilities—just like characters with different classes
and origins. A diverse force is more powerful.
Reasons to Move. Use features that encourage
characters and their enemies to move around,
such as chandeliers, kegs of gunpowder or oil, and
rolling stone traps.

Combat ENCOUNTER DIFFICULTY
Use the following guidelines to create a combat en-
counter of a desired level ofdifficulty.
Step 1: Choose a Difficulty. Three categories de-
scribe the range of encounter difficulty:

Soctat INTERACTION ENCOUNTERS Low Difficulty. An encounter of low difficulty is
likely to have one or two scary moments for the
‘The “Running Social Interaction” section in chapter
players, but their characters should emerge vic-
2 offers advice for handling social interaction en-
torious with no casualties. One or more of them
counters and can help you craft these encounters.
might need to use healing resources, however.
‘The “Nonplayer Characters” section in chapter 3 is
‘As a rough guideline, a single monster generally
also essential for creating these encounters.
presents a low-difficulty challenge for a party of
four characters whose level equals the monster's
EXPLORATION ENCOUNTERS
Challenge Rating.
An encounter centered on exploration might in- Moderate Difficulty. Absent healing and other re-
volve the characters trying to disarm a trap, find a sources, an encounter of moderate difficulty could
secret door, or discover something about the adven- go badly for the adventurers. Weaker characters
ture location. An exploration encounter could also might get taken out of the fight, and there's a slim
involve the characters spending a day crossing
a chance that one or more characters might die.
rolling plain or traversing vast caverns. High Difficulty. A high-difficulty encounter could
‘The “Running Exploration” section in chapter 2 be lethal for one or more characters. To survive
‘can help you craft these encounters as well as run it, the characters will need smart tactics, quick
them. Various sections in chapter 3 can also help thinking, and maybe even a little luck.
you detail obstacles and dangers in an exploration
encounter: see “Chases,” Step
2: Determine Your XP Budget. Using the XP
“Curses and Magical Con-
tagions,” “Doors,” “Environmental Effects,” Budget per Character table, cross-reference the
“Haz-
party's level with the desired encounter difficulty.
ards,” “Poison,” and “Traps” in particular.
Multiply the number in the table by the number of
characters in the party to get your XP budget for
the encounter.

114 CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

XP BupGert PER CHARACTER Example 3. A high-difficulty encounter for six level
Party's Encounter Difficulty: 15 characters has an XP budget of 7,800 » 6, for a

Level Low Moderate High total of 46,800 XP. With that, you could build this
encounter:
1 50, 75 100
+ 2 Adult Red Dragons (18,000 XP each) and 2 Fire
2 100 150 200
Giants (5,000 XP each), for 46,000 XP total
3 150 225 400
TROUBLESHOOTING
4 250 375, 500
When creating and running combat encounters,
5 500 750 1,100 keep the following in mind.
6 600 1,000 1,400 Many Creatures. The more creatures in an en-
counter, the higher the risk that a lucky streak on
7 750 1,300 1,700
their part could deal more damage to the characters
8 1,000 1,700 2,100 than you expect. If your encounter includes more
9 1,300 2,000 2,600 than two creatures per character, include fragile
creatures that can be defeated quickly. This guide-
10 1,600 2,300 3,100
line is especially important for characters of level 1
n 1,900 2,900 4,100 or2.
12 2,200 3,700 4,700 Adjustments. A player's absence might warrant
removing creatures from an encounter to keep it
13, 2,600 4,200 5,400
at the intended difficulty. Also, die rolls and other
4 2,900 4,900 6,200 factors can result in an encounter being easier or
15 3,300 5,400 7,800 harder than intended. You can adjust an encounter
on the fly, such as by having creatures flee (making
16 3,800 6,100 9,800
the encounter easier) or adding reinforcements
7 4,500 7,200 11,700 (making the encounter harder).
a3 5,000 8,700 14,200 CR 0 Creatures, Creatures that have a CR of 0,
particularly ones that are worth 0 XP, should be
19 5,500 10,700, 17,200
used sparingly. If you want to include many CR
20 6,400 13,200 22,000 O critters in an encounter, use swarms from the
Monster Manual instead
Step 5: Spend Your Budget. Every creature has an
XP value in its stat block. When you add a creature
to your combat encounter, deduct its XP from your
XP budget to determine how many XP you have left
to spend. Spend as much of your XP budget as you
can without going over. It’s OK if you have a few
unspent XP left over. Examples are given below:

Example 1. A low-difficulty encounter for four level
characters has an XP budget of 50 « 4, for a total
of 200 XP. With that, you could build any of the
following encounters:

+ 1 Bugbear Warrior (200 XP)

+ 2Giant Wasps (100 XP each), for 200 XP total
+ 6 Twig Blights (25 XP each), for 150 XP total

Example 2. A moderate-difficulty encounter for five
level 3 characters has an XP budget of 225 « 5,
for a total of 1,125 XP. With that, you could build
either of these encounters:

~ 2 Nothics (450 XP each) and 9 Stirges (25 XP each),
for 1,125 XP total
= 1 Wight (700 XP), 1 Warhorse Skeleton (100 XP),

and 6 Skeletons (50 XP each), for 1,100 XP total

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 05

Kontos BuiLo A sanmicade 10

Number of Stat Blocks. The best combat encoun- INITIAL ATTITUDES
ters often pair one kind of creature with another, Apublished adventure typically notes or implies
such as fire giants paired with hell hounds. Be mind- whether a creature's initial attitude toward the ad-
ful of the number of stat blocks you need to run the venturers is Friendly, Indifferent,
or Hostile. In an
encounter. Referencing more than two orthree stat encounter you've created, you can decide that star
blocks for a single encouinter can be daunting, par- ing attitude, or you can randomly determine it using
ticularly if the creatures are complex. the Initial
Attitude table.
Powerful Creatures. If yourcombat encounter
includes
a creature whose CR is higher
than the INITIAL ATTITUDE
party’s level, be aware that such a creature might
diz Ini Attitude
deal enough damage with a single action to take out
4orlower Hostile
one or more characters. For example, an Ogre (CR
2) can kill
a level 1 Wiz: with a single blo 5-8 Indifferent
Unusual Features. Ifa monster has a feature that 9 or higher Friendly
lower-level characters can’t easily overcome, con-
*Roll different dice to alter the range and likelh
sider not adding that monster to an encounter for
tudes. For example, you could rol 1d6 for a predatory monster, 1d6
characters whose level is lower than the monster's ordinary travelers, or 1d6 + 6 for kindhearted indiv
Challenge Rating,
Monster PERSONALITY
MONSTER BEHAVIOR Ifan encounter involves a significant individual, use
he attitudes, motivations, and behavior of the the guidance in the “Nonplayer Characters” section
monsters in an encounter help determine how a of chapter 3 to flesh out the details ofthat indivi
cial interaction plays out (and whether it might ual’s personality and aims. For a group of nameless
erupt into combat) and influence the course of monsters, you can decide on a personality based on

combat. the monsters’ entries in the Monster Manual, or you
can use the Monster Personality table to inform

CHAPTER
4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

how you portray the monsters and their actions. It's Reactive Tactics
simplest to assign the same personality traits to an
A great way to make an adventure location feel
entire group of monsters in an encounter. For ex-
alive—particularly an organized base or strong-
ample, one bandit gang might be an unruly mob of
hold—is to allow its denizens to react to the pres-
braggarts, while the members of another gang are
ence of the adventurers. Once they are aware of
always on edge and ready to flee at the first sign of
trespassers, sapient creatures might either fortify
danger.
their own locations or leave those locations to assist
colleagues and expel the invaders.
Monster PERSONALITY
Take a copy of the adventure map, and pencil in
1d8 Personality the locations of all its inhabitants to give yourself
1 Cowardly; surrenders easily a sense of where they're located relative to each
other. When the adventurers engage in combat or
2 Gree
wantsdy;
treasure
any other noisy activity, assume that nearby crea-
3. Boastful;
makes a show of bravery but runs tures hear the noise and are alerted to the adven-
from danger turers’ presence. (Creatures that can’t hear might be

Disorderly; poorly trained and easily rattled alerted by vibrations or other sensory cues.) Once
weak

alerted, a creature has several options:
Fanatical; ready
to die fighting
Ambush. The creature leaves its current location
Brave; stands firm against danger
and takes up a position near the adventurers’ lo-
Jocular; taunts enemies cation, hoping to catch the adventurers unaware.
Orderly; difficult to rattle Ambushers try to hide and, once hidden, take ad-
vantage ofany opportune moment to attack.
MonsTEr RELATIONSHIPS Fortify. The creature attempts to fortify its loca~
Encounters with groups of monsters can be more tion by using furniture or heavy objects to block
interesting ifrivalries, hatreds, or attachments exist doors or entryways. Increase the DC to force
among the monsters in the group. The death ofa open a blocked door by 3, and hastily blocked pas-
much-revered leader might throw its followers into sageways are Difficult Terrain. A creature with a
a frenzy. On the other hand, a monster might flee ranged attack that selects this option seeks cover
if its hunting companion is killed, or a mistreated in its location.
toady might be eager to surrender and betray its Hide/Flee. If possible, the creature hides in its cur-
boss in return for its life. You can use the Monster rent location, hoping to avoid any adventurers
Relationships table to inspire such relationships that enter. If there is nowhere to hide, the crea-
within a monster group. ture flees to a location farther from the adventur-
ers or flees to any nearby location occupied by its
Monster RELATIONSHIPS allies, Ifa fleeing creature reaches allies, those al-
1d6 Relationship lies are immediately alerted to the presence of the
adventurers; determine how those allies react.
1 Two monsters have a bitter rivalry; each
Investigate. The creature rushes to the sound of
wants the other to suffer,
the disturbance to investigate, possibly joining
2 One monster, bullied by the others, hangs any battle that is underway. A creature that
back and flees at the first opportunity. passes near an ally while moving to investigate a
disturbance might ask that ally to accompany it.
3 One monster is revered or even worshiped by
the others, who will die for it. If you can't decide what an alerted creature should
do, have it make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. On
4 One monster is admired by the group; its
a successful save, the creature either investigates or
allies try to impress or help it.
lays an ambush; on a failed save, it hides or fortifies
5 One monster cares only
for itself and not the its location, When dealing with a group of crea-
rest of the group. tures, the leader makes this saving throw on behalf
6 One monster bullies the others; it forces of the entire group.

them into danger, but they want it defeated. As creatures employ reactive tactics, make notes
about their new locations on your adventure map.

CHAPTER 4 CREATING ADVENTURES 117

PREPARED DEFENDERS of tension (generally, combat encounters offer the
Sapient creatures that have reason to believe their most), but they also feel very different and can
lair is likely to be invaded might set up a defense. have drastically different stakes.
Reasons to set up a defense include the following: Vary Encounter Difficulty. Include encounters
that offer low, moderate, and high difficulty. A
+ Adventurers invaded the lair recently and
mix of low- and moderate-difficulty encounters
retreated.
early in the adventure can lead to a climactic
+ Scouts affiliated with the lair's denizens noticed
high-difficulty fight, perhaps against the adven-
the adventurers heading toward the lair.
ture's primary villain or another threat.
+ A spy ina nearby settlement overheard or discov-
Vary Threats. Build encounters using different
ered the adventurers’ plans and alerted the lair's
threats. If the characters are delving into a kuo-
occupants.
toa temple and therefore expect many encounters
Prepared defenders commonly use one or more of to include various kuo-toa, look for opportunities
the following tactics: to include different monsters that might serve as
guards, pets, or allies to the kuo-toa, Include a
Ambushes and Barricades. Some defenders might
variety of hazards, environmental dangers, and
move from their original locations to locations
traps in exploration encounters, and use NPCs
where they can hide near critical passageways.
with different personalities and different goals in
Defenders might also use furniture and debris to
social interaction encounters.
block off passages, hoping to channel invaders to-
ward prepared strongpoints.
UrcENcy AND Rests
Sentries and Alarms. Some creatures might move
While successive encounters increase tension, tak-
from their keyed locations to locations that allow ing a Short Rest relaxes the tension somewhat, as
them to monitor entrances to the lair. If possible,
characters have a chance to replenish some of their
these creatures might equip themselves with
resources. In many adventures, though, the char-
an alarm such as a horn or improvised gong (an acters and their players have a sense that they need
empty kettle, perhaps). At the first sight ofintrud-
to act quickly to deal with the situation presented
ers, they raise the alarm, alerting nearby allies so
by the adventure. This creates tension between the
those comrades can employ the reactive tactics
need to rest and the sense that things are getting
described above. worse while the characters are resting.
‘Traps. The defenders might place additional traps,
‘You can influence the pace and tension of your
such as falling nets, throughout the lair (see
adventure by determining where and when the
“Traps” in chapter 3).
characters can rest. If the characters are exploring a
If the denizens of an adventure location employ any vast dungeon, consider scattering a few small rooms
of these tactics, update your map as appropriate. with only one door, where the characters can bar
the door and reasonably expect to spend an hour or
ENCOUNTER PACE AND TENSION even a night resting in safety. On the flip side, cau-
A good story hooks you in with an interesting in- tious characters might try to take a Short Rest be-

troduction, builds tension steadily throughout the tween every encounter, never really straining their

story, then reaches a climactic conclusion. It’s not resources. It’s OK to interrupt those rests once in a

always easy to mimic that structure in an adventure while to maintain a sense of tension or to heighten
where the players control their characters’ actions, the urgency, making it clear that even an hour spent

but you can use the encounters you plan to build resting could jeopardize their chances of success.
tension toward a climax. Easing Up. It is possible to dial up the urgency to
Each encounter in an adventure is an opportunity the point that the players feel they don’t have time
to make the characters’ situation more complex to investigate the interesting details they encounter

and urgent, with more significant consequences. in the world. When this happens, consider using a

Successive encounters raise the tension in an ad- helpful NPC to take some of the pressure off. A wise

venture naturally, as characters spend their limited elder might advise them that the situation is not as

resources. Variety also contributes to a sense of es- urgent as they fear, a whimsical Fey being might use

calating tension. Build variety into your encounters ‘magical mischief to force them to slow down, or a

in three ways: Kindly Celestial could tell them they're taking the
concerns of the mortal world just a bit too seriously.
Vary Encounter Type. Use a mix of social interac-
tion, exploration, and combat encounters. Differ-
ent types of encounters provide different amounts

u8 CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

RANDOM ENCOUNTERS zombies creates a sense of horror and suggests the
Random encounters are randomly determined en- possibility of even more terrifying foes.
counters that don't occur in a fixed location. The Provide Assistance. Some random encounters can
options are often presented in a table. When a ran- benefit the characters instead of hindering or harm-
dom encounter occurs, you roll a die and consult ing them, Helpful creatures might give the charac-
the table to determine what the party encounters. ters useful information or assistance.
Sample random encounter tables appear in the Reinforce Campaign Themes. Random encounters
adventure examples later in this chapter. Similar can remind the players of the major themes and
tables appear in many published adventures and conflicts in your campaign. For example, ifa war
rulebooks, and you can easily create your own by between two nations is a major conflict in your
following these examples, campaign, you might design random encounter ta-
Handled well, random encounters can serve a bles to reinforce the ever-present threat of that con-
variety of useful purposes. flict, including encounters with bedraggled troops
Create Urgency. Wandering monsters encourage returning from battle, refugees fleeing invaders,
characters to keep moving and to find a safe place lone messengers riding for the front lines, enemy
to rest. Sometimes you can create a sense of danger war parties, and so on
and urgency by rolling dice behind your DM screen, A Life of Its Own. Sometimes a random encounter
even without an actual encounter! that starts off incidental can become important to
Drain Character Resources. By draining the party's the story. A random encounter with a wandering
Hit Points and spell slots, leaving the adventurers ogre might end with the ogre offering to help the
feeling underpowered and vulnerable, random en- characters get where they need to go, or the ogre
counters can build tension in an adventure. might have something in a nearby den that is sig-
Establish Atmosphere. Thematic links among mon- nificant to the adventure story—a prisoner, a stolen
sters appearing in random encounters create a tone m, or important information. Or the players
and an atmosphere that define the environment the ight find the ogre's personality delightful, prompt-
characters are exploring. For example, an encoun- ing you to make the ogre a more important part of
ter table filled with bats, wraiths, giant spiders, and the story.

CHAPTER 4| CREATING ADVENTURES 119

BrinG IT TO AN END isin the dragon's hoard, an award ceremony where
the queen gives medals to the victorious heroes, or
The climactic ending of an adventure fulfills the
even a time to mourn adventuring companions who
promise of all that came before. The best climax
didn't survive the battle.
is one the players see coming, so if a dragon is the
The denouement can also be an opportunity for
mastermind behind all the nefarious activity hap-
the players to identify loose threads that haven't
pening in an adventure, having the dragon's min-
been tied up—threads that can lead them into the
ions mention the nature of their boss sets up the
next adventure. The “Episodes and Serials” section
coming climactic encounter.
in chapter 5 offers suggestions for weaving these
Although the climax must hinge on the successes
connecting threads.
and failures of the characters up to that moment,
the Adventure Climax table can provide suggestions
to help you shape the end ofyour adventure.
ADVENTURE REWARDS
For some characters, the prospect of mate
ADVENTURE CLIMAX reward is their primary reason for going on adven-
tures, For others it's a welcome added benefit to
1410. Climax
pursuing their other goals.
1 The adventurers confront a villain and a Chapter 7 describes different kinds of treasure,
group of minions in a battle to the finish. but see also “Marks of Prestige” in chapter 3 for
2 The adventurers chase a villain while dodging, other rewards you might use.
obstacles designed to thwart them, leading to ‘The following sections describe how treasure is
2 final confrontation in the villain's refuge. typically dispersed in an adventure,

3. The actions of the adventurers or a villain
INDIVIDUAL TREASURE
result in a cataclysmic event that the adven-
Characters might find small amounts of treasure in
turers must escape.
the pockets, pouches, or personal stashes of indivi
4 The adventurers race to the site where a
ual monsters. Even if'a monster doesn't intention-
villain is bringing a master plan to its conclu- ally collect treasure, characters might find scattered
sion, arriving just as that plan is about to be coins and other monetary treasure left behind by
completed. the monster’s pre i
5 Avillain and two or three lieutenants perform You can use the Random Individual Treasure table
to determine how much treasure a single monster
separate rites in a large room. The adventur-
has based on its Challenge Rating (CR). The table
ers must disrupt
all the rites.
includes the average total in parentheses, which you
6 — Anally betrays the adventurers as they're
can use instead of rolling. To determine the total
about to achieve their goal. (Use this climax amount of treasure for a group of similar creatures,
carefully, and don't overuse it.) you can roll once and multiply the total by the num-
7 Aportal opens to another plane of existence. ber of creatures in the group.
Creatures on the other side spill out, forcing
RANDOM INDIVIDUAL TREASURE
the adventurers to close the portal while deal-
ing with a villain at the same time. CR Treasure

8 The dungeon begins to collapse while a villain 0-4 346 (10) GP
attempts to escape in the chaos. 5-10. 2d8 x 10 (90)
GP
9 The adventurers must choose whether to pur- 11-46 2d10
x 10 (110) PP
sue a fleeing villain or save an NPC they care
17+ 248 x 100 (900)
PP
about or a group ofinnocents,

10 Just when the characters think the main TREASURE HOARDS
threat is defeated, it transforms into a differ- Adventurers sometimes discover large caches of
ent monster or a more powerful form. treasure, the accumulated wealth of a large group
of creatures or the belongings of a single powerful
DENOUEMENT. creature that hoards valuables. The Random Trea-
In most stories, there's a period after the climax, in sure Hoard table can help you create such a cache.
which loose plot threads are tied up and everything ‘When determining the contents of a hoard belong-
is explained. An adventure might also include this, ing to one monster, use the row for that monster's,
kind of denouement: time to discover what treasure Challenge Rating (CR). When the hoard belongs to a

120 CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

‘A cuimnetie earl ar tHe Tempce or ELemenraL

EVIL BRINGS AN AOVENTURE TO A ORAMATIC END.

large group of monsters, use the CR ofthe monster
TREASURE PREFERENCES
that leads the group. Each row includes average
results for monetary treasure, which you can use ‘The Monster Manual gives treasure preferences for
monsters in that book. These preferences are cate-
instead of rolling. To create a hoard for a monster
that is particularly fond of amassing treasure (such gorized as follows:

asa dragon), you can roll twice on the table or roll Any. The monster has a treasure hoard, the con-
once and double the total. tents of which you can determine by rolling on
As a rough benchmark, aim to roll on the Random the Random Treasure Hoard table. Monetary
‘Treasure Hoard table about once per game session. treasure can take the form of coins, trade bar:
Use the guidelines in chapter
7 to determine which trade goods, gems, or art objects (all described in
magic items are in the hoard (see “Awarding Magic chapter 7). Magic items can belong to any trea-
Items” and “Random Magic Items”). sure theme or category (see “Treasure Themes”
and “Magic Item Catego1 chapter 7).
RANDOM Treasure HoaRD Individual. The monster doesn't have a treasure
CR Monetary Treasure Magic Items hoard; however, it might have monetary treasure,
which you can determine by rolling on the Ran-
0-4 2d4 x 100 (500) GP 1d4-1
dom Individual Treasure table. This treasure can
5-10 8d1
x 100
0 (4,400)
GP 13 take the form of coins, trade bars, trade goods,
11-16 8d8
x 10,000 (36,000) GP. 1d4 gems, or art objects (all described in chapter 7).

17+ 6d10 x 10,000 (330,000) GP
‘Treasure Theme (Arcana, Armaments, Imple-
1d6
ments, or Relics). The monster has a treasure
hoard skewed toward a particular theme (see
Quest REWARDS
“Treasure Themes" in chapter 7). You can deter
Sometimes, characters are paid for completing a
mine the size of the hoard by rolling on the Ran-
quest. To determine a suitable quest reward, roll
dom Treasure Hoard table. If the hoard contains
once on the Random Treasure Hoard table, using
magic items, use the guidelines and tables in chap-
the characters’ level for the Challenge Rating (CR).
ter 7 to determine each one.

G ADVENTURES

ADVENTURE EXAMPLES THE FOULED STREAM
This section contains example adventures that Adventure for Level I Characters
demonstrate the principles described throughout Situation, An alien fungus in a cave is polluting the
the chapter. Each provides enough information for stream that flows past the village of High Ery. The
you to run a one-session adventure, with the help of fungus has spawned vile creatures in and around
the maps in appendix B and the monster stat blocks the cave.
in the Monster Manual. Hook. The folk of High Ery are noticing fungal
Each adventure in this section includes the fol- growths on the riverbanks and a layer of scum on
lowing information: the water. The characters might live in the village,

Title. An adventure title can help you organize your or a contact in the Free City of Greyhawk might
campaign notes, and if you share the title with ask them to investigate.

your players, it can set the tone for what's ahead.
ENCOUNTERS
Character Level. Each adventure specifies the
‘The adventure consists of these encounters.
level of characters it’s aimed at. The difficulty of
The First Fork. A mile upstream from the village,
encounters in each adventure is tailored for four
a stream flows into the river from alittle wood on
characters of that level. You can use adventures
the river's south side. Characters can tell that this
for characters of higher or lower level or for
stream is the source ofthe pollution.
larger or smaller groups. However, the encounters
Journey Upstream. Borogrove, a kindly Treant,
might be easier or harder than you expect unless
keeps watch over the wood and meets the charac-
you adjust them.
ters as they follow the polluted stream. He knows
Situation. Each adventure lays out what's going
the source of the corruption is inside a cave that the
on-the situation that the adventurers are called
stream spills out of. He gives the characters a magic
on to deal with. See “Lay Out the Premise” earlier
acorn. If swallowed, the acorn conveys the benefits
in this chapter.
of a Potion of Healing and the Lesser Restoration spell.
Hook. Each adventure offers one way to draw char-
‘Twig Blights. Just outside the cave, the characters
acters in to the adventure. See “Draw In the Play-
encounter six Twig Blights.
ers” earlier in this chapter.
Corrupted Cave. Use the Underdark Warrens map
Encounters. The rest of each adventure description
in appendix B for the corrupted cave. Ignore the
is a series of encounters. The text describes the
secret door and the inner chambers behind it. Close
location where the encounter occurs, often point-
off the tunnels leading off the map to the south,
ing to the maps in appendix B, and any triggering
east, and north. The characters enter the cave in the
event that might provoke the encounter. Monster
southeast, following the stream. The cave's main
names in bold point you to the stat blocks in the
features and inhabitants are as follows:
Monster Manual. Some encounters also specify
treasure the characters might find. Entrance. A Shrieker Fungus just inside the cave
entrance alerts the inhabitants to the characters’
Use your imagination to bring the locations and
arrival. On watch near the entrance and quick to
encounters to life, and build on the ideas the players
respond to the shriekers’ cry are four Bullywug.
bring to each encounter. Alter these outlines freely
Warriors who have fungal growths on them.
to suit your tastes—and those of your players—and
Berserk Bear. In a side cave to the southeast is a
your ideas for your campaign.
Brown Bear that drank from the stream. It's up-
set because the water made it ill. If the characters
A STARTING CAMPAIGN
can make it eat Borogrove's acorn or otherwise
You can use the adventures in this section to get
rid it the Poisoned condition, the bear recovers
a new campaign off the ground. These adven-
immediately and leaves them alone.
tures are linked to locations near the Free City
Ooze's Lair. At the north end of the stream area
of Greyhawk, as described in chapter 5. You can
Psychic Gray Ooze and six Stinges. After defeat-
run the first three adventures in sequence, having
ing these creatures, the characters can destroy
the characters gain a level after each adventure.
the brain-like fungus in the water, which is the
They might return to their home base in the city
source of the corruption. If they do, each charac-
between adventures, or they could travel to Grey-
ter earns a bonus 100 XP.
hawk after they complete “The Winged God.” Use
the encounters and interactions the characters Journey Home. As they leave the wood, the char-
have in these early levels, and the situations that acters encounter Borogrove again. If they used his
interest your players, to plan later adventures. acorn, he gives them another one. If they purified
the source ofthe stream, he gives them a Staff
of,
Flowers in gratitude.

122 CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

MINER DIFFICULTIES THE WINGED Gop
Adventure for Level 2 Characters Adventure for Level 3 Characters
Situation. After miners dug into an Underdark tun- Situation. A few weeks ago, a Red Dragon Wyrm-
nel, a Hook Horror found its way into the mine ling drove a band ofkobolds out of their warren
and became trapped. It has eaten a few miners, to claim the place as its lair. Now some of the
and the others are too terrified of the echoing kobolds are causing trouble in the Cairn Hills.
clicks in the mine to hunt down the predator. They're raiding merchants, hoping the dragon will
Hook. The mayor of the village of Blackstone, allow them to return home as its loyal servants.
Kristryd Splitanvil (@ Lawful Good, dwarf Tough), Hook. A merchant named Nondy Barducks (a Law-
hires the adventurers—perhaps because of how ful Neutral, gnome Commoner) hires the char-
adeptly they handled the situation in “The Fouled acters to escort his wagon to the remote mining
Stream"=to deal with the monster in the mines. village of Diamond Lake, which happens to be
She offers a precious topaz worth 500 GP to ad- near the dragon's new lair. Nondy was robbed by
venturers who kill the creature or drive it away. kobolds on his last trip, and he wants protection
this time. He offers to pay each character 150 GP.
ENCOUNTERS
The adventure consists of these encounters. ENCOUNTERS
Exploring the Mine. Use the Mine map in appen- ‘The adventure consists ofthese encounters.
dix B. In the weeks since the miners abandoned the Kobold Bandits. Along the road, the wagon is sur-
place, pests have flourished in the tunnels. Each rounded by eight Kobold Warriors (Neutral) who
time the characters enter a distinct area of the demand that the merchant surrender his goods.
mine, roll on the following table, In combat, the kobolds shout things like “For the

1d6 Encounter ‘Winged God!" and “Fight to reclaim our home!” If
four of them fall in battle, the remaining kobolds try
1 Four Violet Fungi and one Rust Monster
to flee. Any captured kobold explains the situation,
2 One Giant Spider and two Swarms ofInsects Kobold Supplicants. if the characters continue on
(spiders) their way without pursuing the kobolds, twelve Ko-
bold Warriors (including any survivors of the first
3 One Darkmantle and three Piercers
encounter) and six Winged Kobolds (all Neutral)
A patch ofyellow mold (see “Hazards” in approach the wagon. These kobolds humbly ask the
chapter 3) on a miner's remains adventurers to help them. They promise to return
5 One Gelatinous Cube the goods they stole from Nondy if the adventurers
drive off the dragon.
6 — Sounds ofTerror (see below)
Kobold Camp. If the adventurers follow fleeing ko-
Sounds of Terror. The first time this encounter bolds, they can find the kobolds’ camp on a nearby.
occurs, the characters hear eerie clacking and outcropping. The kobolds there don't fight, though,
scraping noises echoing in the mine shafts and no- instead begging the adventurers to help them (as in
tice gouges in the walls. The second time, they find “Kobold Supplicants” above).
the source of those sounds and markings—the Hook Dragon's Lair. Use the Volcanic Caves map in ap-
Horror. The creature is hungry, but what it really pendix B for the dragon's lair, but close off passages
wants is to find its way back to the Underdark. It to keep the lair small. Near the entrance, the char-
retreats from a fight that is going badly for it. acters encounter a gang of four Magma Mephits
Underdark Connection. The tunnel in the south- and three Smoke Mephits, drawn to the lair by the
east corner of the bottom level of the mine is where magic of the dragon.
the miners accidentally connected to an Underdark In the inner cave, the troublesome Red Dragon
tunnel. The hook horror entered the mine through Wyrmling rests on its little hoard:
ahole in the wall, but the hole closed behind it in a
+ Crate holding Nondy’s stolen goods (worth 400 GP)
cascade of rubble. If the characters clear away the
+ 4,200 CP, 2,000 SP, and 180 GP
rubble from the hole, they hear clacking and scrap-
+ Seven gemstones worth 50 GP each
ing from the other side. The hook horror hears it
too and hurries here to rejoin its kin. As long as the + Potion of Healing
characters stay out of its way, it ignores them as it + Rope of Climbing

scrambles back through the hole, never to plague Two Spell Scrolls (Alarm and Comprehend Languages)
the mine again. Each character then earns a bonus
If the characters defeat or drive off the dragon, each
200 xP.
ofthem earns a bonus 400 XP.

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 123

Horns OF THE BEAST 1420 Encounter
Adventure for Level 5 Characters 18 Two Ankylosauruses tromp through the for-
Situation. A long-forgotten ruin is rumored to hold est nearby. They are territorial and aggressive
a fiendish Artifact called the Horns of the Beast. A but Indifferent, and they won't pursue a flee-
villain hopes to claim the Artifact and put it to ing party.
terrible use.
19 Aband of humans, including a Veteran
Hook. An unassuming human merchant named
Warrior and eight Infantry Warriors, watch
Melchis (secretly a Chaotic Evil Fiend Cultist
the party. They are Indifferent; they live in
devoted to luz) hires the characters to escort him
the jungle and aren't used to seeing other
onan expedition to find an ancient temple lost in
the jungle. He offers to pay them a total of 2,000 people.
GP in trade bars—half when they reach the tem- 20 Four Minotaurs of Baphomet prow! the jun-
ple and half when they safely return to civiliza- gle looking for Humanoids they can capture
tion—and promises to support them with what he and bring back to the temple.
claims to be “limited magical ability.”
Stage 5. Once the characters reach the edge of
ENCOUNTERS the lake, Melchis leads them southwest along the
You can use the poster map of the world of Grey- shore until they find the ruin. This stage covers 90
hawk for this adventure; the temple is located near miles through coastal terrain. The second day of
the southern edge of the map, in the Amedio Jungle. the journey, heavy rain obscures vision and creates
The journey unfolds in three stages (see “Travel” in quicksand pits (see “Environmental Effects” and
chapter 2), culminating in the discovery of the ruins “Hazards” in chapter 3). The front rank of the party
and the artifact. might fall into a quicksand pit while two Giant
Stage I. Melchis hires a ship to carry the party Crocodiles attack at the same time. The rest of the
to the Amedio Jungle. Use the map to determine journey passes without incident.
how long the sea voyage takes, depending on where The Ruins. For the ruins, use the western half of,
the adventurers begin the trip and figuring that the ground floor of the Dungeon Hideout map in ap-
the ship covers about 1% hexes per day. Near the pendix B, and ignore the stairs leading to the lower
end ofthe trip, as the ship crosses Jeklea Bay, it’s levels. Dwelling in the ruins are six Minotaurs of
attacked by a group of Hostile sahuagin, including Baphomet who are Hostile to all intruders. They
two Sahuagin Priests, six Sahuagin Warriors, and are spread out around the ruins but come quickly
a Water Elemental. (Assume the ship's crew stays when they hear combat.
out of the way of these terrifying monsters and lets The Artifact. The Horns of the Beast—a jagged
the characters and Melchis deal with this threat.) crown made from the horns of demons and wild an-
Stage
1 ends when Melchis and the characters row a imals—rests on a pedestal in the northwest corner
launch ashore. of the ruins. Melchis immediately attempts to seize
Stage 2. Melchis leads the characters into the the Artifact and place it on his head. If he does, he
jungle, aiming for the shore of the lake. This stage is transformed into a Hezrou and tries to kill the
covers about 180 miles through the dense forest. characters. A character who dons the Artifact is
Each day of the journey, roll once on the following cursed with Demonic Possession (see “Curses and
table to determine what the characters encounter Magical Contagions’ in chapter 3). The Artifact
on their journey, if anything. can't be removed from the character's head until
1d20 Encounter a Remove Curse spell is cast on the character. If the
characters defeat Melchis and search him, they find
1-14 No encounter
a Bag of Holding containing twelve 5-pound gold
15 An Indifferent Giant Ape protects its terri- trade bars (worth 250 GP each) and a Spell Scroll
tory; its primary concern is getting the party of Teleportation Circle. The scroll also contains the
to leave, igil sequence for a permanent teleportation circle.
At the end of the adventure, each character earns a
16 AHostile Tyrannosaurus Rex is on the hunt
bonus 1,000 XP.
and tries to eat the characters.
Destroying the Artifact. The Horns ofthe Beast
17 Three Allosauruses are hunting in the jungle; can be destroyed only by dropping it in the River
they are Hostile and treat the party as prey. Oceanus, which flows through the Upper Planes
(see chapter 6). A character can learn this by cast-
ing Identify on the Artifact.

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES

Minsc, Boo) ano Decina
rhe Bones. Baw

BOREAL BALL _ + Fidget is a playful Pixie who is Indifferent and
pesters the adventurers with pranks throughout
Adventure for Level 7 Characters
the evening, without causing any actual harm.
Situation. The Baron of the Boreal Ball, a minor
Granny Snailtongue is a Hostile Green Hag who
noble of the Feywild, holds an unending ball in his
sees the adventurers as potentially useful tools.
ice palace. Behind the revelry, the balll is the scene
She offers to help them at every turn in hopes of
for schemes and intrigues.
putting them in her debt.
Hook. The adventurers receive a magical invitation
Raxas Albrethin is an arrogant, Chaotic Neutral
to the Boreal Ball that teleports the group to the drow Mage who is initially Hostile and wants to
ball at the appointed time. see the adventurers humiliated. However, once
the characters’ Renown Score reaches 6, Raxas
ENCOUNTERS
admits he misjudged them and becomes Friendly.
The adventure plays out over three dances. During
each one, the characters can decide whether they Rude Interruption. After the second dance, the ball
dance, mingle, watch the dancers, or engage in some is interrupted by a Neutral Evil Hobgoblin Warlord
other activity. (The Manor map in appendix B can named Varka, who is accompanied by a Hobgoblin
serve asa floor plan for the baron’s palace.) Each Captain and five Hobgoblin Warriors. The hobgob-
character has the opportunity to earn renown for lins are offended by the adventurers’ presence and
the party (see “Renown” in chapter 3) by making a attack them. If the characters defeat the hobgoblins,
positive impression on whomever they're interact- their Renown Score increases by 2.
ing with—a potential Renown Score increase of 1 Conclusion. After three dances, the Baron of the
per character per dance. These guests pay particu- Boreal Ball appears. If the party's Renown Score is
lar attention to the characters: at least 6, he bestows on each character a Charm
of the Boreal Ball. This charm (see “Supernatural
+ Cannifer is a Satyr Revelmaster who is used
Gifts” in chapter 3) allows a character who has it to
to being the center ofattention at every ball he
cast the level 3 version of the Ice Knife spell. Once
attends and is thus Hostile to the adventurers.
used, the Charm vanishes. Each character also
+ Daris is a Friendly, fun-loving Dryad who wants
earns a bonus 1,700 XP.
to be seen dancing with all the adventurers.

CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 125

CHAPTER 5

CREATING CAMPAIGNS
I F ENCOUNTERS ARE THE BUILDING BLOCKS, campaign journal, a collection of notes from past
ofa D&D adventure, then adventures are sessions. Use your journal to refresh your memory
the building blocks ofaD&D campaign, for a on events that transpired early in the campaign and
‘campaign is what you get when you string two or bring closure to unresolved conflicts and mysteries.
more adventures together. A campaign setting is
the world in which those adventures take place— KEEPING A JOURNAL
both a backdrop for your adventures and a hotbed
A campaign journal documents the progression of
of conflicts and personalities that can inspire and
your campaign, from the first game session to the
drive adventures.
last. Your journal can take whatever form works
best for you. It might be a physical notebook; a
STEep-By-STEP CAMPAIGNS binder of loose notes, maps, and tracking sheets; a
Follow these steps to create a campaign: wiki; or a collection of files on your computer. Jour-
nal entries are best organized by date or game ses-
Step 1: Lay Out the Premise. Consider the core
sion. (Some DMs prefer the term “episode” to “game
conflicts driving the campaign, and choose a
session,” but the terms are interchangeable.
setting that reinforces the themes and tone you
A sample Campaign Journal page is provided.
hope to evoke.
‘Make copies of it, or use it as inspiration for your
Step 2: Draw In the Players. Start your campaign
own journal pages.
in a memorable way. Determine how the charac-
ters get drawn into events and how the characters’
UsinG Your JouRNAL
goals and ambitions might come into play.
Step 3: Plan Adventures, Consider the smaller Use your journal to plan out your next game session

conflicts that make up the larger conflicts ofthe (see “Preparing a Session” in chapter 1). Then, when
campaign, and devise fun quests that help drive the game session is over, use the journal to capture
anything else of importance that might have bear-
the story. Flesh out the antagonists, the important
locations, and the elements that link the adven- ing on future sessions, such as the name of an NPC

tures together, you created on the fly or
a critical piece of informa-
tion the characters learned.
Step 4: Bring It to an End, Think about how the
campaign might end and what level you expect During a game session, you can use your cam-

the characters to be when the campaign wraps up. paign journal to quickly recall a piece of infor-
mation you've forgotten (such as the name ofa
‘You might have noticed that these steps are similar character's mule) or to jot down things you want to
to the “Step-by-Step Adventures" list at the start remember later (such as the name of a tavern). In
of chapter 4. In many ways, a campaign is just an this way, the journal becomes a living chronicle of
adventure writ large. In an ongoing campaign, one the campaign in flight.
adventure flows naturally into the next.
Later sections of this chapter offer inspiration and FoRESHADOWING
advice for each ofthese four steps. The chapter con- Foreshadowing is a storytelling technique that
cludes with a campaign example. never goes out of style. Players love it when some-
thing happens in a game session that hearkens to
YOUR CAMPAIGN JOURNAL some event from an earlier session.
Foreshadowing is about planting seeds early so
At the start of any campaign, there's a buzz of
you can reap the rewards later. Having an up-to-
excitement as you and your players look forward to
creating a new world together—one full of adven-
date campaign journal makes foreshadowing easier
because you can reread your notes from earlier,
ture and promise. Every game session is a chance
game sessions and identify things that could re-
for you to show off more of the campaign setting
surface in upcoming sessions, giving past events
and deepen your players’ investment in it.
greater weight or
a bigger payoff. Consider the fol-
If your campaign lasts for months or years, sus-
lowing example.
taining that high level of excitement—yours as well
The characters find the dead body of an unidenti-
as your players'—takes effort. An important tool
fied halfling adventurer. A search of the body yields
to help you keep interest in the campaign high is a

CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS 127

CAMPAIGN JOURNAL

SESSION NUMBER: SESSION DATE:

SESSION/ADVENTURE TITLE:

Important events from earlier sessions that might have bearing on this game session:

Brief summary of what's planned for this game session:

Additional notes:

a cameo necklace containing the portrait of
another Direct Input. Ask your players what they want to
halfling. A character decides to keep the cameo,
do in a campaign. Regularly inquire about how
which was intended as a bit of embellishment. You
they think the campaign is going, what they'd like
make a note of it in your journal. Months later, to experience more of, and what ele
ments they'd
while planning a future session, you flip through
like to explore further. After a session concludes
the journal and are reminded of the cameo. It in-
and between sessions are great times to ask play-
spires you to plan a chance encounter with another
ers for thoughts about the campaign.
halfling, whom the characters might recogniz
e as Indirect Input. The choices a player makes, starting
the one depicted in the cameo. What happens if the
at character creation, can indicate what they want
characters return the cameo to this halfling? This
to see in the game. For example, a Rogue player
halfling could be tied to a bigger plot or have infor-
likely wants opportunities for subtlety or skul-
mation that could help the characters reso
lve some duggery, while a Barbarian player likely craves
conflict. Suddenly, a minor trinket foreshadows
combat. Take note of what encounters players are
bigger events to come. enthusiastic about, and seek ways to help the play-
ers’ characters shine.
ADVENTURE STOCKPILE
Besides tracking each session of your campaign, CHARACTER ARCS
keep a list of adventure ideas. Even if you don't end Like most protagonists in film and literature, D&D
up using every adventure idea, having a stockpile
adventurers face challenges and change through the
will keep you ready for whatever your players
experience of overcoming them. By incorporating
throw at you, and you can even borrow pieces of
each character's motivations into your adventures
various ideas to incorporate into future adventures.
and setting higher stakes through play, you'll help
Not every adventure needs to build on earlier
plots; characters grow in exciting ways. You can use the
a good stand-alone adventure tucked in the middle
DM's Character Tracker sheet to keep track of key
of
a serialized campaign can be a welcome change
information about each character. See “Getting
of pace for you and your players. Players Invested” in this chapter for more ideas.
Character Motivations. For each character, think
CAMPAIGN PREMISE about what motivates them to adventure. Motiva-
Everything outlined about the story of an adven- tions generally fall into the following categories:
ture in chapter
4 is true of a campaign's story as
Goal. A character's goal is a short-term reason for
well: a campaign is like a series of comics or TV
the character to adventure, At the start ofa cam-
shows, where each adventure (like an issue ofa
paign, this might be a desire for treasure, a thirst
comic or a TV episode) tells a self-contained story
for excitement, or some need from a character's
that contributes to the larger story. Just like with an
backstory. As characters continue to adventure,
adventure, a campaign's story isn’t predetermined,
they'll find different goals to pursue, such as find-
because the actions of the players’ characters will
ing a lost relic, honoring an ancestor, avenging a
influence how the story plays out.
fallen mentor, or defeating
a villain.
Ambition. A character’s ambition is a broad, per-
CAMPAIGN CHARACTERS
sonal aspiration the character hopes to achieve
‘The characters are the focus of every D&D.
through a lifetime of adventuring. A character
adventure, and their players are your partners in might dream ofbecoming a legendary knight
developing their characters’ epic journeys. or bringing peace to their homeland. Ambitions
By working with your players to understand might be unrelated to the character's current goal.
what excites them most, you can craft stories they Quirks and Whims. Quirks and whims are a char-
want to see their characters star in. You can also acter's preferences, impulses, or other traits. They
more effectively draw players into adventure plots often emerge during play, such as a character's
(see “Draw In the Players” in chapter 4) if you tendency to one-up a rude innkeeper or their
understand what motivates both them and their oft-expressed fondness for displacer beast fur.
characters.
Players often reveal their characters’ motivations
PLaver INPUT through play. If you're uncertain or a character's
It’s not up to you to create every aspect ofaD&D motivations seem to have changed, it’s OK to ask
campaign. Players contribute through their char- players for clarification,
acters’ actions and by directly sharing what they Family, Friends, and Foes. A character's origin
want to see in a campaign. You can learn about your (species and background) implies some amount
players’ preferences in two ways: of backstory, suggesting the character's family
and what the character did before becoming
an

CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAzONS
Rs

(,
al
_DM’S CHARACTER TRACKER ©
CHARACTER’S NAME:

PLAYER’S NAME:

li PLAYER MOTIVATION

OAcTING © EXPLORING OFIGHTING e) INSTIGATING
O optimizing © PROBLEM-SOLVING © SOCIALIZING O STORYTELLING
NOTES ON PLAYER EXPECTATIONS

CHARACTER DETAILS

CLASS, SUBCLASS LEVEL

| BACKGROUND SPECIES ALIGNMENT

»~
e | \ GOALS AND AMBITIONS FAM LY, FRIENDS, AND FOES

QUIRKS AND WHIMS

I

MAGIC ITEMS

adventurer. Take note of specific background char- CAMPAIGN CONFLICTS
acters—friends, foes, family members, and others—
‘One way to ensure your campaign's longevity is to
who might appear in the campaign.
come up with three compelling conflicts you can
Should these background characters become im-
create adventures around. Introduce these conflicts
portant to the campaign, work with the player to
early in the campaign. As the campaign unfolds,
develop them in detail. Revealing a character's lost
focus adventures on different conflicts to keep the
sibling or childhood rival midcampaign should be
players’ excitement high.
handled carefully to avoid straining credulity. Make
sure a player is comfortable with new developments
Use the Campaign Conflicts tracking sheet to re-
cord your campaign's conflicts (with room to add
about their character before introducing them.
details or notes). A conflict can be as big or as small
Character-Focused Adventures. Adventures should
as you like, and it’s nice to have at least one conflict,
occasionally highlight character motivations or
that can be resolved quickly. Each conflict should
elements of their backstory. Here are a few exam-
involve the adventurers against some antagonistic
ples of character-focused adventures:
force, though you can also create conflicts between
+ Arrival from a character’s past shows up to settle two powerful forces without necessarily knowing
a grudge. which force (if either) the adventurers will align
+ Asneaky character puts their skills to the test by themselves with. The “Flavors of Fantasy” section
leading the rest of the party to conduct a heist. below provides examples of conflicts that reinforce
+ A character learns the location ofa magic item particular themes.
needed to save their hometown. Ifa conflict reaches a satisfying end before the
+ A spellcasting character must undertake a end of the campaign, create a new conflict to
join an exclusive group ofspellcasters. replace it. You can also replace conflicts that don't
Any adventure that focuses on a single character resonate with your players as well as conflicts

should incentivize the whole party to participate— you're having trouble building adventures around.
even if just to help their companion. Avoid focusing
ConFLicT Arcs
adventures on one character too often, and look for
In the same way you think about character ares
opportunities to have character-focused adventures
over the course of a campaign, think about how
for each character from time to time,
each conflict might manifest over the course of the
Setting New Goals. Characters can change their
campaign. How do the characters first encounter
goals whenever they please, but you can encourage
the conflict? How does the conflict develop over
them to do so by giving them significant victories
time? What might a climactic ending to that con-
roughly every 5 levels. When characters accomplish
flict look like?
their goals, consider the following questions:
‘One helpful way to structure a conflict arc is to
+ How does completing this goal create a new use the tiers of play described in chapter 4. Lev-
challenge? ls 5, 11, and 17 represent milestones in character
+ How is this victory only part of what the charac- power and capabilities, and they can also be story
ter wants to achieve? milestones in the arc of your campaign. The shift
+ Who might be upset by the character completing from one tier to another is an ideal time to wrap up
this goal? a campaign conflict and introduce a new one that
+ What is a reward the character will be excited has a broader reach and represents a greater threat.
to receive that also moves them closer to their The threshold ofa new tier can also be an opportu-
ambition? nity for characters to realize the scale of a conflict
they've been dealing withto realize, for example,
Use the answers to these questions to develop new
that the bandits they fought throughout their first
character goals and to inspire further adventures.
four levels are merely puppets of an enemy nation
Building on the Characters’ Actions. Sometimes
they must confront in the second tier.
it can be fun to let the players steer the campaign
‘The “Greyhawk” section in this chapter has
by having their characters’ actions dictate future
examples of conflict arcs.
adventures. For example, if the characters buy a
tavern using the treasure they've amassed, you can
FLAVORS OF FANTASY
adjust the campaign so that the tavern has a role in,
Your D&D campaign might be inspired by a par-
future adventures. One adventure might involve a
competitor trying to put the characters’ tavern out ticular flavor of fantasy, several of which are dis-
of business. Another might use the tavern as the cussed in the sections that follow. Any of these
fantastical subgenres can be informed and inspired
setting for a murder mystery.

CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS 13.

(CAMPAIGN CONFLICTS

Adventurers vs.
CONFLICT 1
{i

| Adventurers vs.
CONFLICT 2

Adventurers vs.
CONFLICT 3

by the cultures, myths, legends, and fantasies of Sworp AND SORCERY
any culture: an epic fantasy campaign could draw A sword-and-sorcery campaign features a grim
on French romances or Chinese wuxia stories, a world of evil spelicasters and decadent cities, where
mythic fantasy campaign could be based on Greek the protagonists are often motivated more by greed
myth or the Epic of Gilgamesh, and so on. and selfinterest than by altruistic virtue.
‘Sword-and-Sorcery Conflicts. In this flavor of cam-
HeroIc FANTASY
paign, magic-users often symbolize the decadence
Heroic fantasy features adventurers bringing magic
and corruption ofcivilization, and mages are the
to bear against monstrous threats—the default sub- classic villains ofthese settings. Magic items are
genre presented in the core D&D rulebooks.
therefore rare and often dangerous. Consider con-
Heroic Fantasy Conflicts. Heroic fantasy cam-
flicts like these to drive the campaign:
paigns often revolve around delving into ancient
dungeons in search of treasure or to destroy mon- Evil Adventurers. An evil band of experienced ad-
sters or villains. Consider conflicts like these to venturers wields power and influence to oppress
drive the action of a campaign: hapless folk.
Evil Weapon. A knight under the influence of a
Evil Cult. Wicked cultists infiltrate a peaceful sentient, evil weapon terrorizes a peaceful realm.
realm to free an ancient evil entity trapped in a
Cultists worship and protect this weapon, which
dungeon. Releasing the entity would surely spell
must be seized and destroyed to end the threat.
the realm’s doom.
Forgotten Dynasty. The long-lost seat of a forgot-
Fungal Plague. To protect a primeval forest from
ten dynasty rises from the sea or the desert sands,
the encroachment of hunters and settlers, druids
and its people launch a campaign of conquest
unleash a fungal plague that quickly gets out of
hand. Epic FANTASY
Old Enemy. An elusive villain who plagued the Anepic fantasy campaign emphasizes the conflict
characters years ago resurfaces, giving the char- between good and evil, with the adventurers on the
acters a chance to finally bring the villain to side of good. These heroic characters are driven
justice. by a higher purpose than selfish gain or ambition.
fn
Characters might struggle with moral quandaries,

F A LONG-LOST OvNAST

fighting the evil tendencies within themselves as Supernatural Horror Conflicts. A supernatural
well as the evil that threatens the world. And the horror campaign often features Undead or demonic
stories of these campaigns often include an element foes whose evil transcends the merely mortal. Con-
of romance: tragic affairs between star-crossed lov- sider conflicts like these to drive the campaign:
ers, passion that transcends even death, and chaste
‘The Faceless Lord. Juiblex, the Faceless Lord, oozes
adoration between knights and nobles.
Epic Fantasy Conflicts. Conflicts like these high-
‘out of the Abyss and into the Underdark. The
light the themes of an epic fantasy campaign: characters hear from subterranean folk who need
help defeating the demon lord and its minions.
Apocalypse. A prophecy predicts the end of the School of Necromancy. Vampires open a college of
world unless the adventurers intervene. Apoca- necromancy, attracting evil necromancers who
lypse cultists oppose the characters at every turn. need fresh corpses for their studies. An order of
Dragon Tyrant. An evil and powerful dragon vampire hunters seeks the characters’ help.
moves into the region, upsetting the ecology and Undying Monarch. A venerable monarch cl
demanding tribute from nearby settlements. power by worshiping Orcus and becoming a
The Foe Time Forgot. An evil foe believed long
dead emerges from the Feywild, alive and well INTRIGUE
after being lost in time. This foe seeks revenge Political intrigue, espionage, sabotage, and similar
against the descendants of long-dead enemies, cloak-and-dagger activities can provide the basis
for an exciting campaign. In this kind of game, the
Myruic Fantasy characters might care more about skill proficien-
A mythic fantasy campaign draws on the themes cies and making friends in high places than about
and stories of ancient myth and legend, from Gil- attack spells and magic weapons, Social interaction
gamesh to Cui Chulainn, Adventurers attempt takes on greater importance than combat. Make
mighty feats of legend, aided or hindered by the sure your players know ahead of time that you want
gods or their agents—and the characters might to run this kind of campaign, Otherwise, a player
have divine ancestry themselves, The monsters and might create a combat-focused character, only to
villains they face might have a similar origin. The feel out of place among diplomats and spies.
chimera in the dungeon isn't just a random beast Intrigue Conflicts. Conflicts like these are ripe for
but the product ofa divine curse. an intrigue campaign:
‘Mythic Fantasy Conflicts. Conflicts like these high-
Feuding Fiefs. Two fiefs or settlements have been
light the themes ofa mythic fantasy campaign:
feuding for years. The characters are drawn into
Divine Trials. Seeking a gift or favor from the gods, the ongoing feud after helping one side.
the adventurers undertake a series of trials that Royal Rivals. The sudden death ofa sovereign
lead them to the realms of the gods, where the plunges a kingdom into chaos when the rightful
adventurers can plead their case. heir is challenged and threatened by rivals,
Divine Wrath. After a temple is sacked, a vengeful ‘Scheming Adviser. After a monarch takes an inter-
god sends an escalating series of woes upon a est in the characters, they become targets of the
kingdom until the temple's relics are returned. monarch's most trusted adviser, who is scheming
Giants. An enormous castle on a cloud settles over to become the true power in the realm.
the land. The characters can battle the giants liv-
ing there or try to broker a lasting peace. Mysrery
A mystery-themed campaign puts the characters
SUPERNATURAL Horror in the role ofinvestigators, perhaps traveling from
If you want to put a horror spin on your campaign, town to town to crack tough cases that local au-
the Monster Manual is full of creatures that suit a
thorities can't handle. Such a campaign emphasizes
storyline of supernatural horror, An essential ele- puzzles and problem-solving in addition to combat
ment of such a campaign is an atmosphere of dread, prowess. An adventure composed of nothing but
created through careful pacing and evocative de- puzzles can become frustrating, so be sure to mix
scription. Your players contribute too; they must be up the kinds of encounters you present.
willing to embrace the mood. ‘Mystery Conflicts. A mystery might set the stage
Whether you want to run a full-fledged horror for the whole campaign. The characters might un-
campaign or a single creepy adventure, discuss your cover clues to this mystery from time to time, while
plans with the players ahead of time. Horror can be individual adventures might be only tangentially
intense and personal, and not everyone is comfort- related to it. Consider conflicts like these for a mys-
able with such a game. (The advice on discussing tery campaign:
limits under “Ensuring Fun for All” in chapter 1 is
particularly important for a horror game.) Criminal Syndicate. A many-headed criminal syn-
icate seeks economic and political power. The

134 CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS

syndicate has spies everywhere, including among
the adventurers’ families or friends.
Shape-Shifting Assassins. A secret association
of doppelgangers or other shape-shifters slowly
assassinates prominent figures one by one.
To Catch a Thief. An extraordinary thief steals,
only the most valuable jewelry and works ofart.
The characters might become a target ofthe thief
when they acquire a priceless treasure.

SWASHBUCKLING
The swashbuckling adventures ofpirates and mus-
keteers make for a dynamic campaign in which
dashing, charming heroes weave their way through
palace intrigues and leap from balconies onto wait-
ing horses to escape dogged pursuers. In a swash-
buckling campaign, the characters typically spend a
lot of time in cities, in royal cour
and aboard
ts, sea-
faring vessels. Nevertheless, the heroes might end
up in classic dungeon situations, such as escaping
from a prison cell block or searching storm sewers
to find a villain’s hidden chambers.
Swashbuckling Conflicts. Conflicts like these high-
light the themes of a swashbuckling campaign:

Inherited Antagonists. A character inherits a
magic item from a deceased relative, unaware that
this relative's enemies are after the item.
Pirates and Privateers. A new monarch cracks
down on piracy by commissioning privateers and
naval officers to hunt pirate ships.
The Waking Deep. A monstrous horror slumbering
in the depths of the ocean stirs, driving minions
such as sahuagin, merrows, or dragon turtles to CROSSING THE STREAMS
attack seafaring vessels. Deep in D&D's roots are elements ofscience fiction
and science fantasy as well as a wide-ranging col-
War lection of fantasy inspiration, and your campaign
A campaign focused on warfare centers on heroes might draw on those sources as well. You can send
whose actions turn the tide of battle. The charac- your characters hurtling through a magic mirror to
ters carry out specific missions: capture a magical Lewis Carroll's Wonderland, put them aboard a ship
standard that empowers undead armies, gather traveling between the stars, or set your campaign in
reinforcements to break a siege, or cut through the a far-future world where laser weapons (see “Fire-
enemy's flank to reach a demonic commander. The arms and Explosives" in chapter 3) and Wands of
party might also support the larger army by hold- Magic Missile exist side by side.
ing a strategic location until reinforcements arrive, Crossing the Streams Conflicts. Conflicts like these
killing enemy scouts, or cutting off supply lines. create opportunities for crossing the streams:
Information-gathering and diplomatic missions can
Beyond the Magic Mirror. A mysterious mirror
supplement combat-oriented adventures.
ina strange dungeon is a portal into a different
War Conflicts. Conflicts like these highlight the
world where whimsical tales unfold—or perhaps
themes and flavor of a war campaign:
some version ofthe modern world.
Freedom Fighters. Poorly armed and disorganized Gamma World. The characters inhabit a post-
subjects of a tyrant revolt. apocalyptic wasteland that is largely medieval in
Invaders. A militaristic nation invades its benevo- feel, but isolated outposts still hold futuristic tech-
lent neighbors. nology from before the cataclysm.
Pawns in a Game. A war rages on for decades, its Invaders from Wildspace. Spaceships land on the
original cause all but forgotten. The people caught characters’ world and disgorge hostile creatures
up in it strive to find meaning and purpose in a armed with advanced technology.
bleak and violent world.

CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS
135

CAMPAIGN SETTING CREATING Your Own SETTING
Just like an adventure's setting (as described in One advantage of creating your own world is it
chapter 4), a campaign setting is an essential part of can be whatever you want it to be. Your players
a campaign's premise, shaping the kinds of stories will never know more about the world than you do,
that unfold there. which can be both a comfort to you and a source of
As the DM, you have two options when choosing, wonder to your players. Moreover, you don’t need to
a campaign setting: memorize any source material about the campaign
setting, other than what you create for yourself.
+ Use a published campaign setting. ‘Whether you create a setting from scratch or bor-
+ Create your own campaign setting.
row elements from established settings, the result

‘Whether you create your own campaign setting needs to resonate with your players. As you create
or use a published one, the world of your game is your world, ask your players what settings and
always your own. You can customize it to suit your genres they enjoy, then use those sources for inspi-
tastes and those of your players. ration to create compelling locations, memorable
inhabitants, exciting conflicts, and an internal logic
UsING A PuBLISHED SETTING that will resonate with your players.
‘One advantage of using a published campaign set- Five Questions to Consider. As you contemplate a
ting is that much of the world-building is done for new campaign setting, think about your answers to
you. However, this means your players might know the following questions:
as much about the setting as you do. You can get
What's Your Campaign Setting Called? Choose an
around this by changing key aspects of the setting
evocative name for your setting. It can be a word
to better serve your needs, which has the added
or phrase that reflects the theme and tone of the
benefit of challenging your players’ expectations.
game, or just a made-up name that sounds cool to
The D&D Settings table describes several estab-
you. Keep a running list of ideas as you decide on
lished campaign settings.
}
other aspects of your setting.

D&D Settincs
Setting Description
Dark Sun Heroes make their mark on a postapocalyptic world defiled by magic and forsak
en by
|
the gods.

i] Dragonlance The forces of good battle the evil queen of dragons and her armies in the world-shaking
| War of the Lance.
] Eberron In the aftermath ofa deadly war, magically advanced nations rebuild as a cold war threat-
ns lasting peace.

Exandria Heroes make names for themselves in the world made popular
by the streaming show
Critical Role.
Forgotten Realms Larger-than-life heroes and villains struggle to determine the fate of the world
as they
explore the ruins and dungeons of fallen kingdoms and long-forgotten empire
s.
Greyhawk As tensions rise among warring nations, heroes plunder dungeons to gain the magic
and
might they need to defeat the growing forces of evil.

Planescape Sigil, the City of Doors, is where heroes begin to explore the wonders
of the D&D multi-
verse and its many planes ofexistence.

Ravenloft Heroes are drawn into the gloomy Domains of Dread—cursed realms
ruled by evil
lords—and must find a means of escape.
Ravnica® Ina world-spanning city, ten di arate factions draw heroes into a web of adventure and

| Spelljammer
danger.

Travel among the stars on a spelljamming ship, and visit worlds floati
ng in the majestic
oceans of Wildspace.
Strixhaven* Strishaven, a school of magic, serves as a hub of learning and adventure.
Theros* Heroic destinies wait to be fulfilled in this setting inspired by the myths of ancient Greece.
is based on a Magic: The Gathering world

136 CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS

What Factions and Organizations Are Prom- CHARACTER CREATION
inent? Nations, temples, guilds, orders, secret When players are choosing their characters’ classes
societies, and colleges shape the social fabric of and origins, you can restrict options that are un-
the setting. What organizations or societal groups suitable for the campaign.
play an important part in your setting? Which Encourage the players to choose different classes
‘ones might be involved in the lives of player char- so that the adventuring party has a range of abili-
acters as patrons, allies, or enemies? What orga- ties. It's less important that the party include mul-
nizations can characters join, becoming part of tiple backgrounds or species; sometimes it’s fun to
something larger than themselves? play an all-Dwarf party or a troupe of adventuring
How Common Is Magic? Spellcasters and magic Entertainers.
item shops might be common, rare, or practically The origins the players choose define who their
nonexistent in your world. How readily available characters were before becoming adventurers.
are spells such as Lesser Restoration, Raise Dead, Think about how the characters’ backgrounds
and Teleportation Circle? Is magic so widespread might inform adventures in your campaign. For ex-
that it’s part of daily life, or so rare that it con ample, if a player chooses the Criminal background,
jures all sorts ofsuperstitions? help the player flesh out their character's criminal
What Mysteries Does the World Hold? Every past, and use that information when building rele-
‘campaign setting has mysteries: a fabled land vant storylines into the larger campaign.
across the sea, a grim forest hiding a terrible se- Starting Level. What level are the characters
cret, restless spirits haunting a ruined keep for when they start? Many D&D campaigns start the
reasons unknown, an ancient dungeon built for a characters at level 1. If you want the characters to
forgotten purpose, and so on. Dream up as many be a bit more resilient and your players are expe-
mysteries as you wish—you never know which rienced, start the campaign at level 3 instead. (See
ones will seize your players’ imaginations and be- the Player's Handbook for rules on starting at higher
come central to the campaign—and record them in levels.)
your campaign journal.
What Roles, If Any, Do the Gods Play? What BRINGING THE PARTY TOGETHER
greater gods, lesser gods, and quasi-deities are During session zero, help the players come up with
present or worshiped in your world? If there are explanations for how their characters know each
gods, how involved are they in the world? Are other and have some sort ofhistory together, how-
they distant and detached beings, or do they ever brief that history might be. To get a sense of
appear before their worshipers and meddle in the party's relationships, here are some questions
mortal affairs? you can ask the players as they create characters:
+ Are any of the characters related to each other?
CAMPAIGN START + What keeps the characters together as a party?
With your campaign journal in hand and the basic + What does each character like most about each
premise of your campaign (characters, conflicts, member of the party?
and setting) in mind, it’s time to consider how to be- + Does the group have a patron—an individual
gin the campaign. or organization that points them toward their
adventures?
SEssION ZERO
If the players are having trouble coming up with a
At the start of a campaign, you and your players can story for how their characters met, you can suggest
run a special session—called session zero because it the following options.
comes before the first session of play—to establish Bonding Event. Some bonding event (such as a
expectations, share ideas, and discuss house rules, wedding, a festival, or a funeral) brings the charac-
with the goal of ensuring the game is a fun experi- ters together, whereupon they quickly discover a
ence for everyone involved. The “Ensuring Fun for shared sense of purpose.
Il" section in chapterI covers some of the most Happenstance. Someone puts out a call for ad-
important groundwork you need to establish at the venturers to complete a quest, and the characters
start ofa new campaign. answer the call. Alternatively, all the characters
Often session zero includes building characters could meet by accident, only to discover they're
together. As the DM, you can help players during headed to the same place, or they could find them-
character creation by advising them on which op- selves trapped together.
tions best suit the campaign. ‘Mutual Acquaintance. The characters are
introduced to one another by a mutual NPC

CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS 137,

acquaintance whom they all trust, This shared ac- Key Events. Describe any current or past events
quaintance could serve as a patron for the party—
that help frame the campaign. For example, the
perhaps a representative of an organization (an
campaign might start on the heels of a great
war
academy, a criminal syndicate,a guild,a military or on the day of a festival. Describing key events
force, or a religious order), a politically powerful helps set the mood and prepare players for up-
person (an aristocrat or even a sovereign), or a mag-
coming adventures.
ical creature like a sphinx or a dragon. House Rules. If you're using any house rules (as
Shared History. The characters grew up in the discussed in chapter 2), or adopting any of the
same place and have known one another for years.
variant rules presented in this or any other book,
Despite their different backgrounds and training, let your players know about them.
they're already good friends
Remember, you'll always know more about your
Tavern Gathering. The characters meet in a tavern
over mugs of ale and decide to embark on a life of campaign world than the players do. Having spent

adventure together—a tried and true trope! all their lives in this world, though, the characters
also know more than their players do. Fil in the
SETTING THE STAGE basics of what the characters should know anytime
Session zero is a great time to share basic informa- that information matters to their adventures.
tion about the campaign with your players. Such
information typically includes the following: STARTING LocaTION
Begin your campaign in a location you can detail,
Starting Location Details. Your pla ers need basic
such as a village, a neighborhood in a larger city,
informat n about the place where the characters
an outpost, or a roadside tavern. Be prepared to
are starting, such as the name of the settlement,
give players enough information about that loca-
important locations in and around it, and prom-
tion to help them figure out what ties, if any, their
inent NPCs they'd know about (see “Starting
characters have to it. Once you have this campaign
Location”).
hub fleshed out, create one or two local attractions

ME OF SORROW
EVEN oeBIN
CAN
ENTURING
G¢
PARTY,

that might serve as adventure locations, such as a of this book, such as the “Nonplayer Characters”
haunted house on the outskirts of town or a dun- and “Settlements” sections in chapter 3, can help
geon complex tucked in the nearby hills. you expand your campaign quickly.
If you're using a published campaign setting, pick
any location in that setting and develop it as you EPISODES AND SERIALS
like. A published setting or adventure might give There are two basic ways to think about how
you all the details you need. The Free City of Grey- adventures fit together in your campaign: as distinct
hawk, described later in this chapter, is an ideal episodes or as a serialized story. If you're not sure
starting location and illustrates the kinds of things which type of campaign to run, ask your players
to consider as you detail a starting location. what they prefer: If your players have different pref-
If you're building your own setting, start small by erences, you can intersperse episodic, stand-alone
detailing only this starting area. The rest of your adventures among serialized adventures to break
setting can remain undeveloped for now. Don't up the bigger story.
spend too much time fleshing out the geopolitical
landscape of your world or locations the adventur- EPISODES
ers aren't likely to visit right away; save those fun An episodic campaign is a campaign in which the
tasks for when you and your players have a better component adventures don't combine to form an
sense of where the campaign is headed. overarching story. Episodic adventures are stand-
alone quests, and the villains who appear in one
First ADVENTURE adventure rarely resurface to trouble the characters
If you're using a published adventure to launch again. If your game group plays infrequently, an ep-
your campaign, use the character hooks in that ad- isodic campaign might be ideal because the players
venture to bring the characters from their starting can enjoy the current adventure even if they've for~
location to the adventure’s action. Many campaigns gotten the details of earlier adventures.
begin with a published adventure and then develop Starting a New Episode. In an episodic campaign,
organically as the characters explore beyond the the start ofa new adventure doesn't necessarily

scope of the adventure. have any connection to the end of the last one. The
If you're creating your own adventure for the action might pick up immediately after the end of
start of your campaign, refer to the advice in chap- the previous adventure, but it might instead begin
ter 4. Keep the first adventure relatively short and weeks, months, or years after the last adventure,

simple, allowing plenty of time for the characters allowing interim events to unfold while the charac-
to get to know each other as the players roleplay. ters take a break from adventuring.
What's most important is that they begin to feel
SERIALS
like an adventuring party and get comfortable with
A serialized campaign is one continuous story bro-
their abilities. The full scope of the campaign can
ken up into smaller parts that flow naturally from
unfold to them later.
one to the next. It often has one or more overarch-
ing threats, and the outcome of one adventure can
PLAN ADVENTURES affect how the rest of the campaign unfolds. If your
AD&D campaign is like a garden. Each new game group meets regularly and often, a serialized
adventure plants new seeds in the garden, which campaign allows you to keep your players guessing
requires regular tending lest it run wild. Over time, what will come next as the campaign builds toward
your campaign will grow and flourish in ways you a satisfying conclusion.
expected and in ways that will surprise you. You Linking Adventures. In a serialized campaign,
might need to weed out elements that aren't reso- make connections between the end of one adven-
nating with your players while planting new ele- ture and the start of the next to help it feel like a
ments to tantalize them. connected story. Sometimes you can simply con-
Most D&D campaigns grow organically, rather tinue the current storyline with new locations to
than having all their elements set in stone from explore and new threats to overcome. Alternatively,
the get-go. From time to time, the characters’ deci- you can use the Adventure Connections table to
sions will require you to improvise and create new inspire a link from one adventure to the next. The
campaign elements on the fly. For example, anew table suggests things you can do near the end of one
location might need to be developed to address the adventure to lead characters into the next one.
needs of the unfolding story, or certain NPCs might
need fleshing out at a moment's notice. Other parts

CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS 139,

ADVENTURE CONNECTIONS need help, such as a local leader, an innkeeper, a
1d6 Adventure Connection patron, a retired adventurer, or a family member.
Friendly Resources. Provide experts or institutions
1 Introduce a person, an object, or informa-
that can assist the characters, like a temple that
tion that the characters need to transport
can provide healing or a learned sage who can
safely to a location involved in the new
help solve mysteries.
adventure. Likable Villain, Craft a villain who has at least one
2 Have
a major villain flee to a location that likable or redeeming quality the characters can
features in the new adventure. The charac- appreciate—ideally a villain who isn’t preoccupied
ters might be able to pursu
the
e villain, or with killing or harming the characters.

they might have to search for clues about As your campaign continues, introduce new people
where the villain has gone. and locations, and bring back favorites from earlier
3 Introduce clues suggesting that a villain or in the campaign for the occasional cameo.

another NPC in this adventure is part ofa
PLAYER FAVORITES
larger group—a group that features promi-
It’s often easier to describe people and places that
nently in the new adventure.
are hostile or frightening than it is to detail a fea-
4 Introduce a villainous group that's featured ture you want characters to love. How can you
in the new adventure by having its agents know what rustic scene will make a character asso-
spy on or interfere with the characters’ ciate a place with home or what personality quirk
activities. will remind a character of their favorite mentor?
You can ask a character's player directly, but instead
5 Have travelers bring news of events trans-
consider handing over your narrative reins and let-
piring elsewhere, leading characters toward
ting a player describe the perfect detail.
the new adventure.
For example, say you have a peaceful village you
6 Give the characters a treasure that's plan to feature across several adventures. You hope
wrapped in mystery they'll need to unravel the characters will connect with the place and treat
in the new adventure, it as home. As the characters enter the community,
they smell something amazing. At this point, you
GETTING PLAYERS INVESTED could describe something you think smells good or
something you think a character would like. Or you
To get your players excited about and invested in
can ask a player, “The smell of something amazing
your campaign, create a setting that features people
drifts from around the corner. What is it?” What-
and places they recognize and where their charac-
ever the player's answer—cinnamon rolls from a
ters’ choices matter.
nearby baker, firework charges being prepared for
‘The following sections suggest ways to help
a celebration, or anything else—becomes part of the
you create a world your players will be excited to
village, and the player has added an important detail
explore,
to the location.
RECURRING ELEMENTS ‘You can use player input whenever you want to
When characters form relationships—friendships, pinpoint something meaningful to the characters
business arrangements, or even lasting antago- and their players. Consider asking players questions
nism—with the people and places ofyour setting, like these whenever you want to describe something
those people and places stick in the players’ minds. in an impactful way:
Introduce opportunities to forge these lasting rela-
+ The tavern owner brings out your favorite dish—
tionships early and often.
cooked to perfection. What's the dish, and what
Consider featuring recurring elements such as makes this one remarkable?
these in your game:
+ The curio shop is selling a trinket that reminds
Community. Introduce a small group or commu- you of one ofyour family members, What's the
nity the characters can think of as their people, trinket, and who does it remind you of?
like a village, neighborhood, guild, or crew. + The local children are playing a game you played
Home Base. Give the characters a place to call in your hometown. What
is it?
home, such as a tavern, a hideout, or a ship. Bas- + The young pickpocket reminds you of someone
tions, as presented in chapter 8, are ideal home you once knew. Who?
bases for characters. + From the animate mass of murderous dolls scram-
Prominent Friend. Create a supportive NPC whom bles a figure that reminds you of your favorite
the characters can trust and turn to when they childhood toy. What is it?

140 CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS

In THE DRAGONLANCE SerTiNG, TANTS AND TiKA

Questions such as these don't need to draw on What stories do NPCs know of the characters’
warm memories. Having players describe what un- past exploits
settles or disgusts their characters can make menac + How might an NPC comment on a character's
ig encounters more impactful as well. In any case, ilities or recognize that they're special?
take note of interesting character details that your
players share, and record them in your campaign Break EpisopEs
journal, as these details might be useful inspiration It's easy to get caught up in a story with dramatic

for later adventures, stakes, pitting characters against mounting threats.
But every so often, at least once every three to five
ACKNOWLEDGE THE INCREDIBLE levels, give the characters a break—a low-stakes
Adventurers are, by their nature, remarkable. Even session or adventure that has nothing to do with the
at level 1, they perform miraculous deeds and pos- overarching plot or broader peril
sess qualities that set them apart from common A break episode can be an opportunity for the
folk. Reinforce this in your game. NPCs don't need characters to reflect on the events of the ongoing
to gush over the characters, but the characters’ campaign, explore the nuances of the world, and
putations as heroes, problem-solvers, or wonder- further develop the relationships between them
workers should be cemented early and develop in a more relaxed setting. Give the group space to
throughout a campaign. breathe, note developments you want to highlight
During every session, look for opportunities to later, then continue with your adventure
make the characters feel like the stars ofthe story, Consider these ideas for a break episode.
and try to answer one or more of the following Bastions Episode, The characters take a break
questions: from adventuring to tend to their Bastions (see
chapter 8), with players taking one or more Bastion
+ How are the charact: ' the perfect people to solve
turns and describing what happens.
a problem?
Carnival Episode. A carnival tempts the characters
+ How are the characters’ talents highlighted during
with magical attractions, games, and prizes. The
the adventure?

CHAPTER
5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS

Witchlight Carnival, described in The Wild Beyond stories need to end in a satisfying way, just as the
the Witchlight, is one such carnival. campaign story does. Ideally, some of the charac-
Creature Comedy. The characters encounter mon- ters’ individual goals will be fulfilled by the final
sters with a comedic flavor—such as flumphs, pixies, adventure. Give characters with unfinished goals a
faerie dragons, or chatty mimics—in a situation that chance to finish them before the very end.
leads to mischie
and
f humor rather than combat, ‘Once your campaign has ended, a new one can
Missing Pet Episode. Someone's pet is missing. The begin. If you intend to run a new campaign for the
characters must search a settlement and connect same group of players in the same setting, using
with locals to help find it. their previous characters’ actions as the basis for
Shopping Episode. A friendly NPC asks the char- legends is one way to invest your players in the new
acters to help shop for someone's birthday. campaign. Let the new characters experience how
Special Event Episode. The characters are invited the world has changed because of the actions or ac-
toa sporting event, holiday celebration, fancy complishments ofthe previous campaign's charac-
dinner, or ball. ters. In the end, though, the new campaign is a new
Vacation Getaway. The characters relax on a quiet story with new protagonists. They shouldn't have to
beach, enjoy the comforts of a grateful noble's villa, share the spotlight with the heroes of days gone by.
withdraw to a serene monastery, or while away the
hours ina fairy hot spring. ENDING SOONER THAN EXPECTED
Sometimes you run out of ideas for your campaign,
TIME IN THE CAMPAIGN
or it gets so sidetracked that you have no idea how
Most conflicts in a D&D campaign take weeks or to bring it to a satisfying conclusion. You might just
months of in-world time to resolve. A typical cam- not feel excited about it anymore, or you might be
paign concludes within a year of in-world time so excited with ideas for a new campaign that you
unless you allow the characters to enjoy lengthy can't focus on the current one. Any of these might
periods of quiet time between adventures. signal the end of your campaign.
If you don't want to track the passage ofdays, ‘The best way forward when you want to end a
weeks, and months, you might instead track the campaign is to talk to your players about it. If you're
passage of time using seasons and seasonal festivals. not excited about the game anymore, it’s quite pos-
‘The answer to the question “When does this adven- sible they're not either, and you can change or end
ture take place?" can be as simple as “in the winter” the campaign to everyone's satisfaction. Consider
or “during the fall harvest festival.” the following possibilities:

Timep Events Player Input. If you're running out of ideas for your
Extraordinary events coinciding with certain times campaign, your players might be more than happy

of year make for great adventure opportunities. to supply you with some. Find out what they'd like
Perhaps a ghostly castle appears on a certain hill on to have happen if the campaign continues. They
the winter solstice every year, or every thirteenth might give you all the inspiration you need!
full moon is blood red and fills werewolves with a Switch DMs. One of your players might have so
particularly strong bloodlust. The appearance of a many ideas about the future of the campaign that
comet in the sky might portend all manner of signif they're willing to take over as the DM. You can
icant events. The festivals of the gods can serve as either take over that player's character or make
opportunities to launch adventures, especially if the a new one of your own. Let go of your plans for
gods themselves are involved. where the story was going, and allow the new DM
to have creative control.
ENDING A CAMPAIGN Transport the Characters. If you or another DM
‘wants to start up a campaign in a new setting but
‘A campaign's ending should conclude the last ofthe
the players don't want to make new characters,
major conflicts and tie up most of the threads of its
consider having the characters travel through a
beginning and middle. (It's OK to leave some loose
portal to a new world.
ends for characters to explore in the next cam-
Arrange a Grand Finale. Sometimes an end to the
paign.) You don’t have to take a campaign all the
campaign is the right answer. Look for ways to
way to level 20 for it to be satisfying; wrap up the
end the campaign with a bang, even if it's earlier
campaign whenever the story reaches its natural
than you originally planned. Flip through your
conclusion.
‘campaign journal to see if there are forgotten ele-
Allow time near the end ofyour campaign for the
‘ments you can resurface for one last hurrah,
characters to finish up any personal goals. Their

142 CHAPTER 5 | CREATING CAMPAIGNS

}) REYHAWK IS A D&D SETTING YOU CAN
GREYHAWK’S PREMISE
} use as the backdrop for your campaign
‘The year is 576 CY (Common Year). Evil is ascen-
or as a model you can reference while
creating your own setting. Important as-
dant across the lands of Eastern Oerik. If something

pects of Greyhawk are described herein so isn't done to curtail the growing threat, Eastern
Cerik will fall to tyrants, evil dragons, and mon-
that you can make it your own, expanding or
strous hordes. Heroes are needed to bring hope to
altering it however you wish.
Greyhawk is the invention of Gary Gygax, one of the people of the Flanaess. Even if the heroes die
the D&D game's original creators. Gary based many trying, the legends of their exploits will live on!
‘Adventuring parties from the Free City of Grey-
of D&D’s earliest adventures in this home-brewed
hawk and other settlements trek across the vast
setting. The version of Greyhawk presented here is
largely based on The World of Greyhawk gazetteer, wilderness of Eastern erik, slaying monsters and
exploring dungeons to find magic items the adven-
published in 1980.
turers can use to defend their homeland and take
the fight to their enemies.
IMPORTANT NAMES
A handful of important names are defined below: GREYHAWK CONFLICTS |
Oerth (pronounced orth or oyth) is the world of Although Greyhawk lends itself well to any D&D
Greyhawk. It has four continents, four oceans, adventure you might want to run, the default set-
and a plethora of islands and seas. ting features conflicts with three major villainous
erik (pronounced or-ick or oy-rick) is one of groups: chromatic dragons, Elemental Evil cults,
Oerth’s continents. and luz and his followers. You can replace one or
Eastern Oerik, the vast region explored in this more of these conflicts with ones of your devising
chapter, is home to many powerful nations and or with ones from the “Flavors of Fantasy” section
some of the D&D game's most famous dungeons earlier in this chapter.
and adventurers. If you use these conflicts, look for opportunities
The Flanaess (pronounced flah-nay-ess or in your adventures to introduce creatures in service
flay-nayz) is another name for Eastern Oerik to the three villainous groups. Give goals to these
and means “land of the Flan.” The region’s first, villains that bring their operatives into conflict with
human settlers and their descendants are known the player characters.
as the Flan. The three major conflicts and the goals of the
Greyhawk is an independent city in Eastern Oerik villainous groups are described below.
that attracts large numbers of adventurers.
Greyhawk doubles as the name of the campaign Curomatic DRaGons
setting. Evil chromatic dragons dwell in the wilds of East-
ern Oerik. For years, adventurers have kept these
Poster Map. evil dragons at bay, sometimes with the help of
benevolent metallic dragons. Lately, the chromatic
Included with this rulebook is a poster map show-
dragons have grown restless, their dreams invaded
ing the lands of Eastern Oerik on one side (each
by the whispers of Tiamat, who is trapped in the
hex on the map is equivalent to 30 miles) and the
Nine Hells. The five-headed queen ofdragons be-
Free City of Greyhawk on the other. These loca-
lieves her escape is nigh, and from the depths of her
tions are described in the “Free City of Greyhawk”
prison, she commands her kin to go forth and claim
and “Greyhawk Gazetteer” sections later in thi
the world of Oerth for themselves. Only the greatest
chapter.
among them will live to become her consorts.

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK / 143

Goals of Chromatic Dragons. Fortify their lairs to ELEMENTAL EviL
safeguard their treasure hoards; strike out across “Elemental Evil” is the name given to a host of de-
Eastern Oerik, raiding poorly defended settlements
structive, extraplanar entities—demon lords, evil
and stealing cattle; demand tribute in the form of elemental princes, and elder gods—who ravaged the
food or treasure; and destroy territorial rivals (dra- world of Oerth long ago. Many of these entities are
conic or otherwise) now trapped in dungeons, with cults and monsters
A Chromatic Dragon Are. The conflict between seeking to free and serve them. Adventurers are the
adventurers and chromatic dragons might follow only ones equipped to keep these malign entities
this broad out! from escaping their subterranean prisons.
Levels 1-4, Consider introducing this conflict as Goals of Elemental Evil. Search for a demon lord,
the adventurers reach level 3 or 4, with the ad- an elemental prince, or an elder god trapped in a
venturers confronting an aggressive chromatic dungeon; build a stronghold above or near the dun-

dragon wyrmling. (You can use the adventure geon; drive other inhabitants out ofthe region; and
“The Winged God” from chapter
4) use a special magic item or ritual to free whatever is

Levels 5-10. The adventurers trapped in the dungeon.
might face a handful
of ambitious young chromatic dragons, without An Elemental Evil Arc. Two published adventures
hinting at a more significant conflict. have explored campaign ares centered around Ele-
Levels 11-16. It eventually becomes clear that the mental Evil. The Temple of Elemental Evil (published

behavior of the adult dragons the characters face in 1985) is set in the world of Greyhawk, in the

isn't normal. The characters might get involved in Kron Hills between Verbobone and Celene. It be-
‘one dragon's schemes to undermine or overthrow gins in the unremarkable village of Hommlet, with
another, or the characters might hear whispers of characters slowly discovering that agents of Ele-

the dragons’ dream of liberating Tiamat. mental Evil have taken up residence in the nearby
Levels 17-20. The conflict reaches its world- ruins and are working to rebuild their great temple,
shattering conclusion, with ancient dragons The rest of the adventure focuses on exploring the

threatening nations and clashing with each other ruined Temple of Elemental Evil and dealing with

in devastating battles. The campaign might end the varied evil factions and forces within (including
with Tiamat herself appearing in the Flanaess— agents of luz, described below).
perhaps emerging from the Riftcanyon (see “Mys-
teries of Greyhawk" in this chapter) or from the
depths
of the Nyr Dyv.

Princes of the Apocalypse, inspired by The Temple
of of luz to the characters. After their return from
Elemental Evil, presents an alternative arc for an
Ele- that expedition, they start having unpleasa
nt en-
mental Evil-themed campaign:
counters with the City Watch in Greyhawk. Even-
Levels 1-4. The characters discover the villaino tually, they discover that Captain-General Sental
us
activity of four elemental cults. Nurev is being manipulated by the leaders of
Levels 5~10. The characters strike at the four Stoink, a petty fief in the Bandit Kingdoms. Whe
head- n
quarters of these evil cults while investigating the characters undertake an expedition into that
the cults’ activities in the surrounding region. dangerous realm to confront Stoink’s leaders and
While the characters are battling one cult in its free the captain-general’s captive brother, they
headquarters, the other three cults might still be discover that the villains were agents of luz.
wreaking havoc nearby, forcing the characte Levels 11-16. luz and the Horned Society launch an
rs to
divide their attention. all-out invasion into the Shield Lands, overwhelm-
Levels 11-16. Finally, the characters discover an ing its defenses and moving toward Furyondy.

ancient Temple of the Elder Elemental Eye deep The characters might have adventures to muster
beneath the cults' separate temples, and they forces in surrounding lands and bring them to
strive to contain the damage wrought Furyondy's defense or hinder luz’s advance.
by the cults’
activities and thwart the cults’ evil leaders before Levels 17-20. Finally, the characters discover that
these leaders unleash an apocalypse. Tuz’s assault is merely a cover to distract the
southern realms from his true aim: retrieving the
Though this adventure is set in the world of the
For- Bye and Hand of Vecna from an ancient keep on
gotten Realms, it includes notes on how you might
Lake Quag. The characters confront luz at the
transplant it into Greyhawk or any other setting.
shores of the lake, perhaps facing a terrible choice:

Tuz THE Evin Will they wield the power of Vecna to stop luz,
North ofthe Free City of Greyhawk, a demigod or will they risk luz wielding that awful might

named luz has reclaimed the vast tract ofland he against them?

lost after being imprisoned under Castle Greyhawk
THE GREYHAWK SETTING
by the archmage Zagig Yragerne. The newly freed
uz aims to lay waste to the kingdoms, steading The planet Oerth is at the very center ofa Wild-
s,
temples, and outposts ofhis rivals. To that end, space system called Greyspace. (See chapter 6 for
luz's spies are searching for powerful Artifacts more information about Wildspace). Oerth has two
they can use to ensure victory, while evil moons: Luna (a great white moon, also called the
creatures
spawn in luz’s homeland and threaten neighboring Mistress) and Celene (a smaller blue moon, also.
realms. Adventurers can thwart luz by keeping evil called the Handmaiden). Greyspace’s sun orbits
Artifacts out of his hands and defeating the vile Oerth, rather than the other way around.
creatures that serve him, ‘The sun takes 360 days to travel once around
Goals of luz. Install loyal operatives in settlements Oerth. Luna waxes and wanes in fixed cycles of 28
across Eastern Oerik, search libraries and vaults days each, upon which the months are based, while
for lore pertaining to ancient and powerful magic, Celene follows a path that has full moons only four
scour dungeons for lost Artifacts and other magic times each year, coinciding with four lunar festivals.

items, secure such items, and use magic and mon-
sters to conquer rival nations. Your Worto’s CALENDAR
An luz Arc. The conflict between adventurers and What does your campaign’s calendar look like?
luz might follow this broad outline. The more your campaign calendar resembles the
‘one that's familiar
to you and your players, the
Levels 1-4. Early in their adventuring careers, the
easier it will be to remember and use. Familiar
characters might face what appear to be ordinary
names for months and days of the week lend
toughs who are disrupting mining operations
your campaign a wonderful simplicity that many
near the Free City of Greyhawk (see “Beyond
players will appreciate. A calendar that uses ten-
the City Walls” in this chapter), only to discover
day weeks or names such as “Moonday” and
these toughs are agents of some greater villain.
“Coldeven' is harder for players to internalize
The identity of this villain remains a mystery—for
but reminds them they’ee in a fantasy world,
now. If you use the adventure “Miner Difficulties”
The Greyhawk calendar has twelve months and
from chapter 4, NPCs speaking to the characters
seven-day weeks like the Gregorian calendar, but
might assume the trouble in the mine is related to
gives unique names to months and days and in-
these toughs and their bullying.
troduces festivals that fall outside the calendar's
Levels 5-10. You might use the adventure “Horns
| months, giving ita fantastical feel.
of the Beast” from chapter
4 to introduce an agent MS

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK
145,

Days oF THE WEEK
Starday Sunday Moonday Godsday Waterday Earthday Freeday
(Saturday) (Sunday) (Monday)
ah Sear

(Tuesday) (Wednesday) (Thursday) (Friday)
Day of Worship
Day of Rest

MONTHS AND FESTIVALS
‘The standard year is 360 days long
and consists
of twelve twenty-eight-day mont
hs (each
month divided into four seven-da
y weeks)
and four six-day lunar festivals (Ne
ed-
fest, Growfest, Richfest, and Brewfe
st).
The midwinter festival of Needfe
st is
considered the start of the year.
The
diagram here shows the months
and
festivals that make up ayear.

FACTIONS AND
ORGANIZATIONS
In addition to the manypoliti
cal
entities that dot the lands of the
Flanaess and the temple
s of its
many gods, several orga
nizations
operate across national
borders in
pursuit of their goals. Some
of these
organizations could serv
e as patrons
or allies of adventurers in a Gr
eyhawk
campaign, while others migh
t appear as
villains, Some might even acce
pt adven-
turers as members,
Circle of Eight. Some ofthe greate
st spell-
casters of the world of Grey
hawk form the
Circle of Eight, a group dedicated
to preserving
balance in the world. The group's gen
eral aim is
to prevent any single countr
y, faction, or other
organized group from becomi
ng too powerful and
overwhelming others. The
membership of the Circle
first line of defense against thes
of Eight is secret but includes Mo e varied threats. In
rdenkainen (the recent years, they have
strategist behind the group), mobilized against the ris
Bigby, Jallarzi Sallavar- ing
threats of Juz and Elemental Evil,
ian, Otiluke, and Otto. forcing them to
broaden the scope oftheir op
Knights of the Watch. The erations into neighbor-
order of the Knights of
ing realms where these evils are
the Watch originated as a active,
mi ry force protecting
Scarlet Order. The Scarlet Orde
the lands of Bissel, Gran Marc r is a monastic or-
h, Geoff, and Keoland der of Suloise militarists wh
from hostile neighbors to the nort ose spies and assassins
h and west (par- have infiltrated many courts and
ticularly Ket and the Ulakan
dar). Though Watchers
castles through-
out the Flanaess, ready to strike
maintain strongholds along . The leader of the
the border with Ket,
order is a seemingly immortal
most of their energy is spent defe being known as the
nding against Father of Obedience, Korenth
giants and dragons in the wester Zan. He is rumored
n mountains, The to be a Suloise monk who
Watchers are sworn to an asceti walked the lands of Oerik
c and disciplined long before the Rain of Colorl
code, and they train rigorously ess Fire destroyed
to the exclusion of the Suloise Empire. Others cl
Personal property or ot aim Korenth is a red
her attachments,
dragon—a former consort of
Order of the Hart. The knights of Tiamat who became
the Order of the trapped in human form,
Hart were organized to preser Whatever the true story,
ve the freedom of the the Father of Obedience is re
states of Furyondy, Veluna, and Hig vered by all who pledge
hfolk against their lives to the Scarlet Order. Hi
the threats of bandits and hos
tile neighbors. These
s goals—and, by
extension, the order's go
nations have little centralized als—are shrouded in my
authority or military s-
tery and could one day tilt
Power, so the knights ha the balance of power
ve historically served as
a across the whole of Eastern
Oerik.

46|\ CHAPTER 5 | GREY
HAWK

ee

ADVENTURERS AND ORGANIZATIONS the north spur of Hepmonaland report dense rain-
Factions and organizations aimed at player char-
forests, severe tropical storms, steamy wetlands,
and a fetid swamp (called the Pelisso Swamp). Ad-
acters can connect adventurers to your world,
venturers are sometimes lured into Hepmonaland’s
providing ties to key NPCs and a clear agenda be-
rainforests by ancient ruins, including tombs and
yond individual gain. in the same way, villainous
shrines left behind by an ancient civilization of bat-
‘organizations create an ongoing sense of menace
like humanoids whose history is largely forgotten.
beyond the threat of solitary foes.
Devastating Magic. Almost a thousand years ago,
Having different characters tied to different
the war between the Baklunish and Suloise empires
factions can create interesting situations at the
came to a horrific end. The Baklunish people who
gaming table, as long as those factions have
similar goals and don't work in opposition to one lived in what is now the Dry Steppes called down
arain of colorless fire that burned all living things,
another all the time, Adventurers representing
ignited the landscape, and reduced the Suloise lands
different factions might have competing interests
to ashes, creating the Sea of Dust. In retaliation,
or priorities while they pursue the same goals,
Suloise survivors invoked their own magic to dev-
Adventurer organizations are also a great source
astate the Baklunish lands. What magic was respon-
of special rewards beyond Experience Points and
sible for the Rain of Colorless Fire and the Invoked
treasure, Increased standing in an organization
Devastation? What would happen if such magic fell
might come with concrete benefits such as ac-
into the wrong hands today?
cess to an organization’ information, equipment,
Accentral portion of the Dry Steppes, where the
magic, and other resources. See “Renown” in
chapter 3 for rules you can use to track charac-
seat of the Baklunish empire stood, is said to remain
pleasant and rich, roamed by Baklunish nomads.
ters’ standing in an organization.
eee diet in ‘The former Suloise capital, by contrast, in the heart
ofthe Sea of Dust, is beset by howling winds, terri-
Macic IN GREYHAWK
ble dust storms, and rains of volcanic ash and cin-
In the world of Greyhawk, as in most D&D worlds,
ders from the nearby Hellfurnaces.
magic is widespread but still wondrous and some-
Land of Black Ice. Those who have ventured far
times frightening. People everywhere know about
north of the Burneal Forest tell ofa strange phe-
magic, and most people see evidence of it at some
nomenon. Instead of normal stark-white snow and
point in their lives. Magic permeates the cosmos and
translucent blue-white ice, there is an endless land-
moves through the ancient possessions of legendary
scape of deep-blue ice partially covered in snow.
heroes, the mysterious ruins of fallen empires, those
Strange arctic monsters prowl these fields of dark
touched by the gods, creatures born with supernat-
ice. Stranger still, a verdant land is rumored to exist,
ural power, and individuals who study the secrets of
beyond the ice, where the sun never sets.
the multiverse. Histories and fireside tales are filled
Riches of the Bright Desert. The Bright Desert,
with the exploits of those who wield magic.
walled off from the rest of the Flanaess by the
What normal folk know of magic depends on
monster-infested hills of the Abbor-Alz and the
where they live and whether they know people who
aptly named Gnatmarsh, is supposedly filled with
practice magic. Citizens of an isolated hamlet might
copper, silver, gold, and precious stones. The harsh
not have seen true magic used for generations ex-
climate, wildly varying temperatures, and hostile
cept the strange powers of the old hermit living in
inhabitants discourage exploration. Expeditions
the nearby woods, which they regard with suspicion
have attempted to penetrate the Bright Desert and
and mention only in whispers.
extract its riches, but none have ever returned.
By contrast, magic is common enough in the
Riftcanyon. Between the Bandit Kingdoms and
Free City of Greyhawk that the Guild of Wizardry the Shield Lands stretches a deep canyon, ten miles
teaches magic and sells spellcasting services. Exten-
wide at the ends, thirty miles wide at its midsec-
sive codes of law govern the use and abuse of magic.
tion, and 180 miles long. The Riftcanyon, which is,
The law treats magical coercion as a major crime,
more than a mile deep, is home to at least one blue
and punishes the public use of magic in situations
dragon and has tunnels near its base that lead to the
that could harm people or property.
Underdark.

Mysteries or GREYHAWK White Plume Mountain. Situated just south ofthe
Riftcanyon, the ever-smoking White Plume Moun-
Eastern erik is a realm of many mysteries, several
tain has always been a subject ofsuperstitious awe
of which are described below.
to the neighboring villagers. People still travel many
Bat-Folk of Hepmonaland. Separated from Eastern
miles to gaze upon this natural wonder, though
Oerik by the Tilva Strait, Hepmonaland is a rela-
few dare to approach it closely, as it is reputed to
tively small continent that few people of the Flan-
be the haunt of demons and devils. The occasional
aess known much about. Those who have explored

f San pee
CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

Brrr
iooe

Gops oF GREYHAWK
Name and Epithet Home Plane Typical Worshipers symbol
Beory, Heart of Oerth* Material Plane Farmers, herders Green disk
Berei of the Hearth Bytopia Families, farmers Sheaf
of wheat stalks
Boccob the Uncaring, Arch- Outlands Sages, spellcasters, seers Eye within a pentagram
mage of the Gods*

Celestian, the Far Wanderer Astral Plane Wanderers, astronomers Arc of seven stars inside
acircle

Cuthbert of the Cudgel Arcadia Practical, honest folk Circle at the center ofa
starburst oflines
Ehlonna of the Forests Beastlands Hunters, foragers Unicorn horn
Erythnul, the Many Pandemonium Raiders, bandits, berserkers Blood drop
Fharlanghn, the Dweller on Outlands Travelers Circle crossed by a curved
the Horizon horizon line
Heironeous the Invincible Mount Celestia Knights, soldiers Lightning bolt
Hextor, Scourge of Battle Acheron Soldiers, tyrants ‘Six down-pointing arrows
ina fan
Incabulos, the Black Rider* Hades Necromancers, those who Reptilian eye within a hor-
seek to ward off illness izontal diamond
+ Istus, Weaver of Our Fate* — Mechanus Seers, advisers Spindle with three
strands
luz the Evilt Material Plane His subjects and allies Grinning human skull
Kord, the Brawler Ysgard Athletes, berserkers Spears and maces radiat-
ing from a point
Nerul, the Reaper* Carceri Murderers, necromancers Skull with a scythe
: Obad-Hai, the Shalm Outlands Hunters, gatherers, hermits ‘Oak leaf and acorn
Olidammara, the Laughing Ysgard Revelers, gamblers, Laughing mask
Rogue pranksters
Pelor, the Radiant Sun* Elysium Healers, the compassionate Sun
Pholtus of the Blinding Light Arcadia Judges, lawyers, arbiters Silver sun partially
eclipsed by a crescent
moon

Ralishaz, the Unlooked For Limbo Gamblers Three bone fate-casting
sticks
Rao, the Mediator* Mount Celestia Mediators, sages, scientists White heart
Syrul Oathbreaker Gehenna Liars, charlatans, traitors Forked tongue
Tharizdun, the Eater of Imprisoned ina_Nihilistic cultists Spiral rune
Worlds demiplane
Trithereon, the Summoner Arborea Rebels, individualists Triskelion
Ulaa, the Bejeweled Arcadia Miners, jewelers, quarriers Ruby-hearted mountain
Vecna, the Whispered One Unknown Necromancers, undead, those ‘An eye in the palm ofa
who keep or unearth secrets left hand
Wee Jas, the Witch Acheron Spellcasters, advisers Red skull in front of
fireball

disappearance of those who stray too close to the
Plume reinforces this belief.
White Plume Mountain is detailed in Tales from
the Yawning Portal.

Gops oF GREYHAWK
‘The Gods of Greyhawk table shows many of the
most popular deities worshiped in the Flanaess,
Greater gods and demigods are marked as such; the
others are lesser gods. Many other deities and demi-
gods are also worshiped in the Flanaess, beyond
those shown on the table. Some deities of Greyhawk
have also transcended their origin on this world
to impact the broader multiverse. Two of these,
‘Tharizdun and Vecna, are described in appendix A.
The greater gods of Greyhawk rarely get directly
involved with happenings on Oerth. Lesser gods
are more likely to manifest in some form on the
Material Plane and interact with their worshipers.
Cuthbert, for example, is well known for appearing
in mortal guise, appearing as a dirt-covered farmer,
a wanderer robed in brown and green, or an elderly
tinker. And of the many quasi-deities that appear on
Oerth, most prominent among them is Iuz, a demi-
god who rules his own nation in the Flanaess.

FREE City OF GREYHAWK
Would-be heroes are drawn to the Free City of
Greyhawk by promises of adventure. The city is rife
opportunities for peril and plunder.
The city stands on the eastern banks of the Selin-
BASTION FRIENDLY
tan River. The river flows south from the Nyr Dyv ‘There are ample places within the city and on

(the Lake of Unknown Depths) down to Woolly Bay the city’s outskirts where adventurers can build

and remains easily navigable for its entire length. Bastions (see chapter 8).

Once a frontier hub of the Great Kingdom of
Key Conruicrs
Aerdy, Greyhawk proclaimed itself free and inde-
‘Two of the three central conflicts of the Greyhawk
pendent seventy-eight years ago, claiming the Seli
setting—the threats of Elemental Evil and luz—are
tan basin as its territory. Adventurers drawn to the
the source of major tension and intrigue in the Free
nearby ruins of Castle Greyhawk have provided a
City of Greyhawk. The third conflict, involving evil
steady influx of cash to the city in the years since.
dragons, is a looming threat nearby, particularly in
‘Throughout this section, if a creature's name
the Mistmarsh, the hills of the Abbor-Alz, and the
appears in bold type, you'll find that creature's stat
Bright Desert.
block in the Monster Manual. Ifa creature's
ment isn’t specified, you can decide what it is. Loca Hurty-BurLy
Greyhawk has a frontier spirit atypical for a settle-
START HERE
ment of its size. The locals are a tough and rowdy
‘The City of Greyhawk is a great starting point for lot. Adventurers seeking action don't need to look
a D&D campaign for many reasons, as discussed in far, as the city contains more than its fair share of
the sections that follow. troublemakers.

ADVENTURE Hooks NEARBY ATTRACTIONS
The city contains plenty of rumors, local legends, North of the city are the Cairn Hills, which are
and quest givers, any of which could point char- known to have tombs and dungeons hidden among
acters to their next adventure. The sample adven- them. Nearby are a forest, a swamp, and a desert.
tures in chapter 4 can all begin in the Free City of ‘The monsters that haunt these areas tend to be
Greyhawk. weak—perfect for testing the mettle of low-level
adventurers.

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK | 149

PORT IN THE STORM Crry Activities
The city provides a place to rest, heal, acquire
in- Greyhawk is an ideal place for activities that sup-
formation, and procure magic items, Adventur
ers port adventuring. There's endless opp
ortunity for
looking to visit distant lands can book passage on social interaction in such a bustling place,
as well
ships docked at the wharf.
as places where characters can rest and recupera
te
Trape Hus between adventures, acquire new adventuring gear,
and spend their gold.
Adventurers can buy gear and sell their hard-w
on
loot in the city’s shops and markets.
Home Base
sa home base for characters, Greyhawk can serv
How To Use THE City e
as a place to live, train, and recuperat
e between
serve the follow: adventures. As described under “Getting Play
ers
ing important functions in a campaign.
Invested” in this chapter, Greyhawk offers a host
of
potential friends, rivals, villains, and resources. Use
BACKGROUND CONNECTIONS
the people and locations mentioned
Use the backgrounds of the characters to conn in this chapter
ect asa starting point for fleshing out char
them to people and places in the city. acters’ con-
These con- nections to the city, and work
nections help the players feel like Greyhawk with your players to
is their develop those connections. Choose one
characters’ home—or neighbor-
will quickly become thei
hood of the city (see “City Neighborhood
new home. A character who was bor s” below)
n and raised asa focus for the characters and their activiti
in Greyhawk might have known one of es,
the city’s
prominent figures for many years, while someone UrpAN ADVENTURES
who has just arrived in the city might have a mutual A city isn't just a place to spend time between
ad-
friend with that connection or might carry a lett
er ventures~plenty of adventures hap
pen within the
of introduction recommending them to that city walls. From wererats in the sewers to sche
per- m-
son. (Each location detailed in the
“City Locations ing bureaucrats in the halls of power,
dangers lurk
section includes potential connections around every corner,
for two char-
acter background

Tue Free Ciry oF Gaev
ai
aise
wes un

Ciry OVERVIEW an adult halfling. The city’s portcullises are usually
left open even when the gates are closed.
The city is yours to make your own. A few im-
Each gate is contained within a small gatehouse
portant features and locations are described in the
flanked by a pair of towers. The tower tops and con-
sections that follow, but otherwise flesh out the city
necting blockhouse are equipped with arrow slits
as you and your players see ft.
and holes for pouring boiling oil straight down onto
City GOVERNMENT invaders. Each gatehouse tower connects to the city
‘The Free City of Greyhawk is ruled by a council through a door in its base and to the wall top by a
called the Directing Oligarchy, made up of six- door in its side. The towers contain three platforms,
teen coequal rulers. This council elects its chief beginning at the top of the wall and extending up-
officer, the lord mayor—a position currently held ward. Each of these can shelter and provide a firing
by a human Spy Master (Lawful Neutral) named platform for up to forty archers.
Nerof Gasgol. The other directors include the Three of the city's gates typically remain open
captain-general and constable ofthe City Watch, throughout the day and night: the Highway Gate
several guild masters, priests of Boccob and Rao, the (the grand entrance to the city), the Cargo Gate
spector of taxes, and a few influential magic-users (used primarily by traders and merchants), and the
with ties to politically active secret societies. Sev- Garden Gate (one of the city’s two inner gates). The
eral of these directors represent criminal or unsa- remaining gates are closed from dusk until dawn,

vory interests, including Nerof Gasgol himself, who and a visitor must produce a written message from
achieved his position and wealth as the owner ofa the lord mayor of Greyhawk, the captain-general
notorious gambling den. of the City Watch, or a head of state to be allowed
through. In the latter case, the guards ensure the
Crry WatcH traveler is harmless before opening the gates.
The City Watch is a standing garrison of some eight ‘Those passing through open gates aren't asked
hundred Guards and Veteran Warriors. Bolstering to explain their business, nor are they detained or
these defenders are Mages from the city's Guild of turned back unless they are recognized as known
Wizardry, as well as Priests from local temples. fugitives. Wagons and carts might get searched if
‘The captain-general and constable of the City they trigger the guards’ suspicions, but most ve-
Watch are stationed at the Grand Citadel (see “City hicles are waved through without inspection. The
Locations”). guards keep a daily roster of who and what pass
through their gates,
Crtry Watts
A.30-foot-high stone walll winds like a snake around CRIME
the city. Two other walls, identical in height to the ‘The Free City of Greyhawk is home to many
outer wall, separate the city into its three great thieves, vandals, charlatans, and hooligans. Crimes
sections. Access to the wall tops can be gained via are divided into three categories.
lifts in each gatehouse. In addition, along the inside Petty Crime. Public unarmed brawling, pickpock-
base of the outer wall are secret compartments at ting, vandalism, and other crimes that cause up to
300-foot intervals, each one containing a 30-foot- 50 GP in property damage are petty crimes. The
tall wooden ladder. All members of the City Watch perpetrator pays a fine of 2d10 GP or works to pro
know the locations of these secret ladders, which, vide restitution,
in an emergency, can be pulled out and used by city Minor Crime. The category of minor crimes in-
defenders to quickly reach the parapets. cludes armed assault (defined as any nonfatal attack
‘The walls are patrolled regularly. During daytime, made with a weapon or damaging spell) and prop-
the typical patrol is one sentry (a Guard) placed erty crimes that cause between 50 and 250 GP in
every 300 feet along the top of the wall. At night, damages. The perpetrator must pay a fine of at least
the guard patrol is quadrupled, with two sentries 100 GP and is sentenced to 1d6 years in prison.
posted together every 150 feet along the wall. Also Major Crime. Crimes more severe than those de-
at night, torches light the wall top at 150-foot inter- scribed above—including murder, bribery or imper~
vals between the guards so each sentry station is 75, sonation of a city official, and magical coercion—are
feet from a torch in each direction. major crimes. The criminal faces 2d10 years of
imprisonment, the death penalty, or permanent ex-
Crry Gates
ile. A city magistrate decides which punishment is
Each city gate consists of a pair ofiron-reinforced
wooden doors that can be barred from the inside,
appropriate.
‘These heavy doors are backed by a massive portcul-
lis of iron bars. A very small child might be able to
squeeze between the bars, but not a youth or even

Oy, CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

RELIGION Crry Locations
The city has temples and shrines dedicated to var-
The locations detailed here can serve as a good
ious gods. Religious practices that are certifiably
starting point for your campaign. Use them as ex-
evil aren't tolerated, however. When an evil sect is
amples when fleshing out new locations for your
discovered in the city, its wealth is confiscated, its
game.
leaders are put to death, and all other members are
banished from the city for life. BLACK DRAGON INN
See the “Gods of Greyhawk” table for many deities
worshiped by the inhabitants of the Free City.
This three-story, slightly run-down inn is situated
Ciry NEIGHBORHOODS in the heart ofthe city. A sign carved to resemble
The Free City of Greyhawk is split into three main the grinning visage ofa black dragon hangs over
sections by two internal walls running west to east. the front door. A stable is located behind the inn.
The northern section is home to the High Quarter
and the Garden Quarter, where the wealthiest folk
‘The Black Dragon Inn in Clerkburg has good food
of the city reside. The central section is home to the
and affordable rooms. The inn’s stable can hold up
River Quarter, Clerkburg, the Artisans’ Quarter,
toa dozen steeds.
and the Foreign Quarter. The southern portion,
The inn's proprietor is Miklos Dare, a human Vet-
known as the Old City, includes the poorer and
eran Warrior (Chaotic Good) who loves to recount
rowdier neighborhoods of the Slum Quarter and the
his heroic exploits in the Battle of Emridy Mead-
Thieves’ Quarter.
‘ows seven years ago, when warriors from across
Brief descriptions of the city’s neighborhoods are
the Central Flanaess united to drive the forces of
presented below:
wickedness from the Temple of Elemental Evil (see
Artisans’ Quarter. The Artisans’ Quarter is built “Central Flanaess” in this chapter). A red-bearded
around a large marketplace. The finest artisans bear ofa man with a prosthetic leg, Miklos is affable
live and work here, and the city’s trade guilds are and proud. His friendly rivalry with Olaf and Sivan,
headquartered here. the proprietors ofthe Silver Dragon Inn just up the
Clerkburg. Clerkburg is the university district of street, is the talk of the city. Olaf and Sivan recently
Greyhawk, with dozens of schools and colleges hired a mage to make Miklos's black dragon sign
and the businesses that support them. Temples drool acid, much to the chagrin ofvisitors entering
line the appropriately named Street of Temples in and leaving the Black Dragon. Miklos is itching to
the southeast corner of the district. pull a similar prank of his own,
Foreign Quarter. The Foreign Quarter is among Character Backgrounds. An adventurer with the
the most multicultural districts of the city, and it Soldier background might have a tie to Miklos, per-
boasts fine apartments and restaurants. haps having fought alongside him at the Battle of
Garden Quarter. The Garden Quarter is an extrav- Emridy Meadows. A character with the Wayfarer
agant neighborhood similar to the High Quarter, background might know Miklos as a generous man
but the mansions aren't quite as ornate, the es- who gives away food and sometimes even lodging to
tates aren’t as large, and it’s not as gaudy. people in need.
High Quarter. Palaces, temples, mansions, and Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the Black
gardens fill the posh High Quarter. Extravagant Dragon Inn for one of the following reasons:
architecture and wide-open spaces define this
Eavesdropper’s Paradise. Many clandestine meet-
quarter.
ings occur at the Black Dragon. Adventurers
River Quarter. The River Quarter encompasses
eavesdropping on private conversations might
taverns and entertainment venues, as well as the
overhear tantalizing rumors or uncover valuable
wharves along the Selintan River outside the city
information.
wall. Because it’s a hub of trade, it’s the most di-
Information Source. If the adventurers let Miklos
verse, multicultural part of the city.
tell stories of his past exploits or agree to help him
Slum Quarter. The Slum Quarter is the poorest,
play a prank on his rivals, he can steer them to-
most desperate region within Greyhawk’s walls,
ward new adventure opportunities. He's also quite
full of crime-ridden apartments.
familiar with the nature of Elemental Evil.
Thieves’ Quarter. The buildings of the Thieves’
Place to Stay. The Black Dragon is close to the
Quarter are slightly less run down than their
city’s central marketplace. A traveler can sleep in
Slum Quarter equivalents, and its people are mar-
a common room for 2 SP per night or secure a pri-
ginally better off.
vate room for 5 SP per night. A luxury suite costs
2GP per night.

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

lerkb
leith omg
(Black Dragon inn
awh

Granp CITADEL Great LIBRARY

‘Amany-towered fortress looms above all quar- The front of this building is a grand sweep of
ters ofthe city from its position atop a low rise. granite walls and tall columns. A wide ramp
Its outer walls, darkened by soot and smoke, leads to a pair of massive doors flanked by stone-
could use a good scrubbing. carved dragons. Inside, it’s cool and musty.

The grand edifice at the northern end of the High Weapons and armor aren't permitted in the Great
Quarter, simply called “the Citadel” by the city’s Library. If anyone wearing armor or carrying a vis-
inhabitants, contains barracks for the City Watch, ible weapon tries to enter the library, or ifa thief is
the offices of the captain-general, the city's trea~ spotted trying to leave the library with one or more
sury, and a large store of armaments for the emer stolen books, the stone-carved bronze dragons
gency citizen militia. The Citadel also contains a flanking the entrance animate and attack. These
prison where the city’s most hardened criminals are statues are Stone Golems.
incarcerated, Abra Saghast, a crusty and irascible dragonborn
The captain-general ofthe City Watch is Sental sage, serves as the head librarian, Abra, an Arch-
Nurey, a tall, human Veteran Warrior (Neutral mage (Chaotic Good), has bright-green eyes, and
Good) with thinning blond hair and a mustache. her bronze scales are tinged with aquamarine blue.
Sental is usually incorruptible, but he is under great She typically wears a patchwork robe.
stress, The rulers of Stoink, a fortified town in the Abra sits behind a high desk in the main hall. Six
Bandit Kingdoms, have captured Sental’s brother open archways lead from the main hall to wings
Sarek and are forcing the captain-general to provide where the bulk of the library's books are shelved,
information about Greyhawk’s defenses and local free for visitors to peruse (but not remove from the
politicians. Sental gives this information to a human library). The library has several sages and scribes
Spy (Chaotic Evil) who stays at the Black Dragon under contract to write books, mostly detailing
Inn under the false name Skanda Drond. Sental is current affairs in the city.
‘unaware that the bandit lords of Stoink are pawns An iron door leads to a hallway behind the head
of luz, whose dreams of conquest extend to the Free librarian’s desk. Three scribes (Mages) labor here
City of Greyhawk and far beyond. and act as sentries, for next to their desks are three
‘The city’s constable-who serves as second-in- locked, iron doors to the library's vaults. Arcane
command to the captain-general, manager to the Lock spells seal these doors, beyond which are re-
members of the watch, and a member ofthe Di- positories for the library's most valuable or scandal-
recting Oligarchy—is a compassionate Priest of ‘ous works. Next to each scribe's desk is a pull cord
Pelor named Derider Fanshen (Neutral Good). Her hanging through a hole in the ceiling. A tug on any
kindness and talent for healing make her well loved one of these cords releases a homing pigeon from a
among the watch, and as a former adventurer, she is loft above the library. It takes the bird 1 minute to
sympathetic to adventurers’ needs. She's unaware of find and alert an Archmage, who teleports to the
Sental's compromised position. main hall of the library to investigate.
Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the
Criminal or Guard background might have a con- Sage or Scribe background might have a connection
nection to the Grand Citadel involving a past run-in to the Great Library and its proprietor.
with the law or past service on the watch. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the
Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might be drawn to Great Library for one of the following reasons:
the Grand Citadel for one of the following reasons: Research. Adventurers searching for a specific
Appointment. The adventurers have an appoint book or more information about a specific topic
ment to speak with Sental Nurey, perhaps because might find what they're looking for in the library.
they need help freeing a companion who was ar- Spellbooks. The adventurers might need to purloin
rested for a crime or because they wish to report a one of the many spellbooks kept in the library, ne-
threat to the city. cessitating a carefully planned heist.
Break-In or Breakout. The adventurers are hired Spell Scrolls. Adventurers can commission the
to break into the Citadel's treasury vault or break scribes to create a Spell Scroll that bears a Wizard
someone out of the Citadel's prison spell oflevel 5 or lower. See the Player's Handbook
Imprisonment. The adventurers are imprisoned in for the time required to craft a scroll; the scribes
the Citadel for some heinous crime. charge double the cost shown there.

154 CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

‘Tue Siuver DRAGON INN 16 A LIVELY HUB OF

Activity IN Gaeviiawn’s FoneiGn Quanren.

HicH Tower INN Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the High
‘Tower for one of the following reasons:

Conveniently located near the Selintan River, Information Source. Erlynn knows all the local
this inviting inn is distinguished by its tall tower, rumors. If she trusts the adventurers, Erlynn can

which is pointed at the top like the hat of
an direct them to an NPC who needs their services.
Place to Stay. The adventurers need a place to stay,
eccentric wizard. The clientele is notably wealthy,
and the High Tower boasts comfortable quar-
but the inn itselfisn’t
at all ostentatious.
ters, ample supplies of wine and ale, and spicy
food. The establishment has six private sleeping
The High Tower Inn’s human proprietor, Erlynn chambers, each of which rents for 3 GP per night.
Goodfellow, is a soft-spoken, middle-aged, pot- Three of these guest rooms are in the tower, each
bellied Mage (Lawful Good) with gray hair, bright- one on its own floor.
blue eyes, and platinum-rimmed spectacles. She Spellcaster. The adventurers might have business
dabbled in adventuring before realizing she had with a powerful spellcaster staying at the inn.
little taste for danger and her life's calling might in-
SttveR DRAGON INN
volve more sedentary pursuits. Few guests know of
Erlynn’s magical abilities, as she rarely casts spells
in front of strangers. This grandiose, multistory inn sports a wooden
The High Tower, located in the Garden Quarter, is sign bearing the words “Silver Dragon Inn” in.
a favorite haunt for some of the city’s most famous
fancy silver script, the S shaped like a silver drag-
wizards, including Otto and Jallarzi.
on. A more modest sign next to the front door
Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the
reads, “No metal armor. Shields and weapons
Merchant or Noble background might have a con-
must be checked at the door.”
nection to the High Tower Inn, which caters to peo-
ple of means.
‘The grand Silver Dragon Inn, located in the For-
eign Quarter, is often the first place sought by new

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK 155

ae hha

arrivals to the city. The prices are average, but the Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the tem-
food servings are huge. The inn's menu includes ple for one of the following reasons:
spicy bean dishes, seafood delicacies of the Wild
Adventurers Wanted. The priests keep tabs on
Coast, and rice and vegetable entrées.
threats in the region around the city. They're pay-
‘Weapons larger than daggers must be checked at
ing close attention to rumors of dragon activity in
the door, together with shields. Customers wearing
the nearby Cairn Hills, and they're looking to hire
metal armor aren't admitted. Two bouncers (Neu-
adventurers to investigate these rumors.
tral Tough Bosses) stand at the door, politely en-
Healing. Adventurers can purchase Potions of Heal-
forcing the rule.
ing for 50 GP each, and the temple's priests have
The inn’s married human proprietors, Olaf Al-
1d4 such potions in stock on any given day. The
Azul (Chaotic Good Veteran Warrior) and Sivan
priests also have Cure Wounds and Lesser Resto-
ALAzul (Chaotic Neutral Assassin), speak multiple
ration spells prepared and customarily cast them
languages and use humor to raise spirits and diffuse for free. For more powerful magic, such as Greater
tensions. Olaf can almost always break up a fight
Restoration and Raise Dead spells, the priests direct
before it starts, generally with a round of drinks for
the adventurers to the Temple of the Radiant Sun.
the instigators. Sivan is quiet and introspective, but
Safe Travels. By making a small donation to the
he always keeps a hilarious joke or cutting remark
temple, adventurers increase the likelihood of safe
at the ready.
travel to their next destination.
Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the
Teleportation Circle. Though it isn’t the only per-
Artisan or Entertainer background might do busi- manent teleportation circle in the city, the circle
ness with the Silver Dragon Inn.
within the Temple of the Far Horizon is the easiest
Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the Sil-
to access. The priests allow free access to the tele-
ver Dragon for one of the following reasons:
portation circle in either direction. For 2,000 GP,
Meeting with Foreign Dignitaries. Foreign dig- the chief priest will cast the Teleportation Circle
nitaries come here to enjoy the Silver Dragon’s spell to open a connection to another permanent
food and accommodations. Characters who plan circle on the Material Plane.
to visit distant lands might connect with these
esteemed visitors.
‘TEMPLE OF THE RADIANT SUN
Place to Stay. The Silver Dragon is centrally lo-
cated in the city and has twenty-four guest rooms This copper-roofed temple has a gold-inlaid sym-
on the upper floors. A traveler can sleep in a com- bol of the sun above its double-door entrance.
mon room for1 SP per night, a private room for 3
During the day, sunlight shines through high win-
SP per night, or a luxury suite for 1 GP per night.
dows to illuminate the temple's interior, which is
Security. The Silver Dragon Inn prides itself on
adorned with golden draperies.
being a safe stop for visitors. Its proprietors and
bouncers are trained to deal with trouble without
the support of the City Watch. This temple, dedicated to serving the god Pelor in
the heart of the Garden Quarter, opens at dawn and
TEMPLE OF THE FAR HORIZON
closes at dusk. In a sanctuary in the heart of the
temple, Priests conduct daily morning rites, as well
Hidden among the city’s grander temples is a as all-day observances every Godsday.

quiet, modest house of worship with clay-tiled Sarana, the temple's Archpriest (Neutral Good), is
rooftops, a corner bell tower, and well-tended a middle-aged, human woman wearing a sun-shaped
headdress and yellow-and-gold robes. She is never
vegetable gardens. Sick and hungry folk gather
seen in public without her Staff
of Healing. Sarana
in short lines outside as they wait for priests to
has straw-colored hair, green eyes, and a forgiving
attend to their needs.
nature.
Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the
Situated in the Garden Quarter, this temple is dedi- Acolyte background might have served in the Tem-
cated to Fharlanghn, a god favored by travelers and ple of the Radiant Sun, while those with the Farmer
mercenaries. The Priests who staff the temple offer background might seek it out as a place for blessing.
nourishment, rest, and healing to those in need, day Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the tem-
and night. Several small rooms are maintained for ple for one of the following reasons:
guests, and simple, hot meals are free to all visitors.
Healing. The temple sells Spell Scrolls of Greater Res-
Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the
toration for 3,200 GP apiece and Spell Scrolls of Re-
Guide or Sailor background might have a connec-
move Curse for 300 GP apiece, and the priests have
tion to the temple, which offers help to travelers.

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

1d5 copies of each scroll in stock on any given day. | UNEARTHED ARCANA
The priests also have Cure Wounds and Lesser Res-
toration spells prepared, which they
REE Ss
customaril
vi [Eateune nena nen ean depicting
Raise Dead. Archpriest Sarana is one ofa handful a white-bearded human wizard holding a staff
of people in the Free City of Greyhawk who can that has a copper ball affixed to its tip. Displayed
cast the Raise Dead spell, but she needs the requi- in the store's window box are various potions,
site 500 GP diamond to do so, Sarana can recom- scrolls, wands, and wondrous oddities.
mend a jeweler who sells diamonds ofsufficient }
value. Before agreeing to cast the spell, Sarana
ff 5
casts Zone of Truth and asks questions about Magic tems are bought and gold in Unearthed An,
the deceased individual to make sure she's not Senay a qusiat shop in Clerkbuarg: Magical Waris
feturming 6 life acnseGiic wh ahuld stay decal render the store’s windows and doors shatterproof
,
Besrice to Wie Grcater Good The temple sight and no one can use magic to enter or leave
the shop
call upon the adventurers to perform good acts in Without the consent ofits proprietor, Morley, whose

the city or abroad. Sarana is particularly vigilant Lie take eeefee aes Guach
about the threat of Elemental Evil, since she was ésdvlicgaublice
involved in the battle at the Temple of Elemental ood) who spends his days shape-shifted into a
net
Evil seven years ago. In exchange for their service, talkative, alert, white-bearded human mage wear-
ikea Wat fraged vob GaGa
the character and thelr companions are entitled” IRE8 Pointed hat frayed robes nd pointed slippers.
toa 50 percent discount on goods purchased at ee
Sane
crc aeee tthe city Ang ving the es
teemed local members of the Circle of Eight,
Jallarzi

Sallavarian and Otto—know Morley’s true form.
Morley is one of the city’s secret weapons, ready
to repel invaders or break a siege should the need
arise. The dragon has a soft spot for adventurers
who risk their lives for good causes. He occasionally
loans magic items free of charge to valorous heroes
who can't afford them, on the condition that the
items be returned to him as soon as they're no lon-
ger needed.
Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the
Charlatan or Hermit background might have a con-
nection to Unearthed Arcana, as Morley has a vai
ety of unusual interests.
Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit Un-
earthed Arcana for one of the following reasons:

Buying and Selling Magic Items. Morley buys and
sells magic items at standard prices (see chapter
7). Although he keeps a few magic items in the
shop to catch the eye, most of his inventory is
stored in extradimensional vaults only he can ac-
cess. The shop sells many Common, Uncommon,
and Rare magic items—mainly potions, rings, rods,
staffs, wands, and wondrous items. Morley has
access to a few Very Rare and Legendary magic
items as well
Free Loan. A benefactor arranges for Morley to
loan the characters a magic item to help them
complete a quest. Before giving them thi
Morley asks they return it in pristine condition.
Magic Item Identification. Morley can cast the
Identify spell at will. He charges 50 GP for each
casting ofthe spell.

CHAP
5 | GREYH
TEAWK R / 157

a CITY OF GREYHAWK &
AND ENVIRONS

158 \ CHAPTERS
| GREYHAWK

BEYOND THE City WALLS Gorge of the Selintan. Soaring cliffs flank
the
‘The City of Greyhawk and Environs map Selintan River for nearly ten miles. Spanni
shows the ng this
lands around the Free City of Greyhawk. Locations gorge, 800 feet above the river, is a ston
e arch
on the map are presented below as pla bridge sculpted to look like an extension of
ces where the
adventures can happen: natural bedrock. The bridge allows easy
travel
between Greyhawk and Grossettgrottell.
Blackfair Manor. Typical ofseveral man As a
or houses defensive measure, the bridge's gnome
and keeps scattered across the Pla architects
in of Greyhawk, hid an iron pin somewhere in the bridge; if this
Blackfair Manor was founded by a dis
tinguished pin is removed, the entire structure coll
cavalry commander. Its stable is the mos apses.
t famous Grossettgrottell. An industrious community of
source offast, durable warhorses across
the gnome miners and foragers lives in
this network
breadth ofthe Flanaess, drawing shrewd shoppers
of hewn tunnels and natural caverns. The
from Greyhawk and beyond. The manor gnomes
house is trade gemstones and rare fungi in exchange
surrounded by farms, extensive pastureland, for
and help repelling monsters from the Underdark.
a small village with a mill, taverns, a
smithy, and a Marsh Keep. Like Blackwall Keep, Marsh Kee
saddlery. p
is newly built and watches over the Mistmarsh
Blackstone. See “Mining Towns" below. .
‘The Dwarfwalk road leads east from
Blackwall Keep. One of two new kee the tower to
ps built to Greysmere, a quarrying town with a larg
keep an eye on the e popula-
Mistmarsh, Blackwall Keep tion of dwarves,
is a strong, stone tower with a horse corral sur-
Mining Towns. Blackstone, Diamond Lake,
rounded by a wooden stockade. Soldiers and
from ‘Steaming Springs are small mining towns gov-
Greyhawk garrison the keep and venture out
from erned and protected by the Free City of
Grey-
it to patrol the northern edge of the swamp.
hawk. The city frequently dispatches adventur
Cairn Hills. Hidden among the hills north and ers
east to quell threats to the towns’ miners
and mining
of the city are ancient tombs and half-buried ruin
s operations, which of late includes agen
ts of luz
that attract adventurers, bandits, cultists of
Ele- intent on destabilizing the city's economy.
mental Evil, and monsters.
Mistmarsh. This vast swamp holds the half-sunken
Castle Greyhawk. Travelers who follow the Seli
n- ruins of an ancient city that is now shroud
ed by
tan River westward from the city come toa ston
e fog and guarded by a family of black dragon
bridge. From there, they must travel seve s.
ral miles Will-o'-wisps lure prey to the ruins, where doo
northeast to reach the ruins of Castle Gre m
yhawk. awaits,
Built by the archmage Zagig Yragerne and aba
n- Peculiar Manor. Like other manors in the
doned with his demise, the ruins (and the man Plain of
y- Greyhawk, Peculiar Manor was established
leveled dungeon below) are a powerful draw by a
to now-forgotten hero of an ancient war. However,
adventurers who seek wealth, glory, and magical a
few years ago it was purchased by retired adve
ight. All manner of marvels are said to fill n-
the turers from Ekbir, Sanjarah and Chetna Moh
ruins, including numerous portals to sin.
other planes. ‘The Mohsins brew an extraordinary ale they call
Diamond Lake. See “Mining Towns” below. Old Peculiar, which lends its name to the manor.
Elmshire. This sleepy town with a sizable half
ling Steaming Springs. See “Mining Towns” above.
‘opulation lies on the shore of the Nyr Dyv. Fish
- Stone Bridge. A small garrison in the fort of Ston
ing boats crowd the wharves. The townsfolk wel- e
Bridge keeps careful watch over river traffic
come peaceful visitors—particularly adventur
ers approaching Greyhawk.
who can help fend off monsters, bandits, and cult
s Stonefort. A garrison ofsoldiers from Greyha
of Elemental Evil lurking in Cairn Hills. wk
watches over the southern Nyr Dyv from the
Ery Villages. The villages of High Ery and high
Erybend battlements of Stonefort. The fort also guards
are populated largely by farmers who sen
a
d most gravel quarry.
of their produce for sale in Greyhawk. The two ‘Tokhel Castle. This blasted ruin sta
nds on a rocky
villages are both dominated by two pro
minent promontory above the Nyr Dyv. A dead magic
families, the Fairheights and the Witherwinns.
zone (see “Environmental Effects” in chapter
The families have a complicated history includin
g 3) encompasses most of the ruin, and monste
abundant instances of feuding and intermarriag rs
e, guard whatever secrets the ancient castle and
as well as a catalog oflesser slights and its
favors. dungeons might hold,
Ford Keep. A ferry crossing allows traffic fro
m ‘Two Ford. The small village of Two Ford relies
Greyhawk and regions to the south to cross on
the river trade to supply its inns, smithies, and
mer-
Selintan River at its first major bend. The lord
chants. Ore from the mining towns is also trad
mayor of Greyhawk built Ford Keep here ed
to pro here, as it is easier to transport it by river than
tect the crossing from bandits.
overland,

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

oS ie oy

Sa ee

GREYHAWK GAZETTEER Northern Flanaess. In vast wilderness expanses
populated by indigenous folk, one’s mettle is
The poster map in this book shows the entire region tested by the environment and roving dragons.
of the Flanaess, with the Free City of Greyhawk Old Keoland. The former provinces of Keoland
near the center. As characters venture beyond the
contend against evil monsters from the western
confines of the city and its surrounding lands, you mountains, including dragons and giants.
can use the map and the information on these pages
Western Flanaess. The Baklunish peoples and.
to inspire your own adventures and world details.
nations navigate complex political relationships.

THE Bic PICTURE
Livine History
To understand the Greyhawk of today (the year
Greyhawk has a long history of ancient empires
576 in the Common Year), itis helpful to picture
and more recent wars, but the only relevant
the Flanaess about 200 years ago. At that time, the
details of this history are those that feature in
Great Kingdom ofAerdy stretched from the Vast
your adventures. Highlight significant in-world
‘Swamp to the Rakers, and from the Solnor Ocean
details by revealing them in the course of your
to the Yatil and Lortmil Mountains. Between the
adventures. Use the following techniques to share
Lortmil Mountains and the Crystalmists was the
lore with your players:
Kingdom of Keoland, mimicking the Great King-
dom in its imperialist approach. To the west of the Echoes of the Past. Features like a crater in the
mountains, the Baklunish nations—survivors of the side ofamountain, a defaced statue in the town
Invoked Devastation—stood much as they do now. square, or a holiday celebrating a local hero
And to the north, nomadic peoples (the Chakyik, provide concrete touchstones to past events.
the Wegwiur, the rovers of the Hunting Lands) and ‘The characters might learn that a ruin they're
the North Kingdoms were, as now, independent of exploring was destroyed in a catastrophic battle
the politics of the south. or natural disaster.
‘The contraction of the two southern realms over Historical Records. Written historical details
the last two centuries is the primary force that has ‘might appear anywhere in an adventure: glyphs

shaped the modern Flanaess. First, the provinces on ancient dungeon walls, books in a library,
of Perrenland, Veluna, and Furyondy—far from the files in a royal vault, or tapestries depicting key
overking’s throne in Rauxes—declared their inde- events. Use such set dressing to share import-
pendence from the Great Kingdom. When Nyrond ant details. Summarize what lengthy works say,
joined them (in 356 CY), the stage was set for the and focus on the most plot-worthy parts.
slow disintegration of the Great Kingdom and the Scholarly Expertise. Characters who have profi

ongoing rebellion that dominates the eastern part of, ciency in the Arcana, History, or Religion skill
the Flanaess to this day. can be fonts of useful information. When it
‘The beginning of Aerdy’s decline marked the would be helpful for a group to know something
high-water mark of Keoland’s expansionist poli- about the setting, ask such characters to make

cies, as it held sway from the Pomarj to the borders an Intelligence check using the relevant skill,
of Ket. Aided by Celene, rebels in the Ulek region then share plot-relevant details if their roll war-
strove to curb the kingdom's warlike ways, and the rants

accession of King Tavish IV in 453 CY marked a Magical Footnotes. Spells such as Contact Other

dramatic shift in royal policy. The Yeomanry and Plane, Legend Lore, and Speak with Dead allow
the Ulek states were granted autonomy, the Gran characters to learn information while leaving
March and Sterich became semi-independent while you control of the particulars.
remaining loyal to the crown, and the diverse Primary Sources. Personify the past through a
peoples ofthis region coexist in relative peace tragic ghost, an otherworldly guardian, an ar-
once again. tifical intelligence, an ancient sage, or another
With this big picture in mind, you can think of the longrlived individual, Such NPCs give you a way
Flanaess beyond the Free City of Greyhawk as five to share relevant information and respond to
major regions, each with its own store ofadventure questions from the party. If the characters miss
possibilities waiting to be explored: an important detail, this NPC can reinforce de-
tails in a way books and recollected facts can't.
Central Flanaess. Diverse peoples clash against luz
and the forces of Elemental Evil. Any one of these methods is useful for revealing
Eastern Flanaess. The remnants of the Great King- a few details. You can combine them to share nu-

dom struggle to determine the fate ofthe lands in anced histories and help players feel like they're

the overking’s wicked clutches. digging into a rich and realistic history.

(heayus)
ee

CHAPTER
5 | GRIEYH. AWK 161

¥ CENTRAL FLANAESS _ Veluna. Their marriage would have united Fury-
ondy and Veluna as a single entity, with the canon
The rich soil and pleasant climate of the region be-
of Veluna ruling in matters spiritual and the king
tween the Nyr Dyv and the Yatil Mountains—com-
bined with healthy trade relations between these
of Furyondy ruling in matters temporal. This com-
bined state, with its powerful elf allies in Celene,
realms and their neighbors to the east, south, and
could wage a steady war against the evil plaguing
west-make this a strong and prosperous region.
Eastern Oerik. The prince's disappearance has
BATTLE or EMRIDY MEADOWS stalled these plans.
Seven years ago, knights and soldiers from Fury-
Tue Rise oF luz
ondy, the Archclericy of Veluna, the Viscounty
luz is the offspring of the demon lord Graz'zt and a
‘of Verbobone, and the elven kingdom of Celene
human archmage named Iggwilv. For ages, he ruled
formed an alliance to repel an evil horde that
the lands from the Howling Hills to Lake Whyestil,
had gathered in the grassy fields south of the
naming his domain after himself. These lands are so
Velverdyva River. This clash of armies—arguably
despoiled and dangerous that the otherwise fierce
the greatest seen in Eastern Oerik—was called the
nomads of the Hunting Lands and Wegwiur pass
Battle of Emridy Meadows. The forces of evil were
through the Cold Marshes rather than enter the
smashed, and their remnants were driven back into
merest edge of luz’s realm.
the dungeons under their stronghold, the Temple of
uz's evil reign was interrupted by a sixty-five
Elemental Evil. The forces of good, under the com-
year imprisonment in the dungeon under Castle
mand of Prince Thrommel IV of Furyondy, besieged
Greyhawk. During his absence, the Kingdom of
the temple, which fell in a fortnight. Only a few of
Furyondy and its allies prospered, while the land
the temple's wicked leaders escaped, and it is sus-
pected that these individuals were responsible for
of luz. was overrun with evil bandits and monsters.
Iuz’s absence turned him into a legend and attracted
the subsequent kidnapping of the prince.
a host of new followers, whose misplaced faith in-
Prince Thrommel was engaged to marry Lady
vested him with the power of a demigod.
Jolene, a priest from a prominent noble family of

162 CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

4
(CENTRAL FLANAESS LOCATIONS
Location Ruler Description
Celene Queen Yolande (elf) Elven monarchy with large gnome and halfling populations
Dyvers (Free City) Magister Thymantia Important port and trading center with a powerful navy
Gortoz (aasimar)

Furyondy, the King Belvor
IV (human) Former province of the Great Kingdom, among the first to
Kingdom of claim independence
Highfolk (Free City) Mayor Talisyr (appears as Fortified city with large population of elves; the mayor is a
anelf) disguised adult silver dragon

Horned Society, the Nine hierarchs (mostly Theocracy ruled by devil worshipers allied with luz, sup-
humans and hobgoblins) ported by mercenaries enforcing their tyrannical rule

luz luz (cambion demigod) The monster-infested domain ofthe demonic dictator,
steeped in wickedness
Nye Dyv The Lake of Unknown Depths; home to barge dwellers

Perrenland Voorzitter Yrenda Fiercely independent confederation of canons
Schwartzen (human)
Pomarj, the Lawless peninsula; home to bandits and marauders
Shield Lands, the Various allied nobles Independent alliance of nobles protected by the Knights of
Holy Shielding, led by Knight Commander Aleshh Kaarth
(Gragonborn) and fortified by Furyondy and Urnst
Veluna, the Canon Hazen (human) Theocracy ruled by priests ofRao, a divine beacon of us-
Archclericy of tice and hope
Verbobone (Free City Viscountess Wilfrick Rejjin \Vassal state of Veluna; site of the Temple of Elemental Evil
and Viscounty) (human)

Wild Coast, the Various burgomasters, Free territory with self-governing settlements; haven for
lord mayors, and others outcasts and dissidents

Upon winning his freedom, luz had no trouble re- and the Horned Society) they have little tolerance
claiming his homeland. He forged tenuous alliances for would-be tyrants or aloof nobility.Amid a large
with the leaders of the Bandit Kingdoms and the number of free cities and confederations, the mon-
Horned Society, whom he controls through terror. archies of Furyondy and Celene are far more demo-
With their aid, he aims to destroy his neighbors and cratic in practice than those in other regions.
lay waste to the Free City of Greyhawk. ‘Typical dress in the Central Flanaess includes
Since the resurgence of luz, the northern quar- a tunic of varying length, sometimes worn with
ter of the Vesve Forest and the eastern part of the close-fitting trousers. A cape or cloak, usually fea-
Howling Hills have become filled with marauders turing patterns of ovals or diamonds, completes the
and monsters. While the Wegwiur battle luz’s ensemble. The cuisine of the Central Flanaess uses
forces in the Howling Hills, scouts and troops from rice and potatoes alongside cheese and meat that is
Furyondy join forces with Highfolk’s defenders to typically boiled or roasted.
drive out the Vesve Forest’s evil inhabitants.
CENTRAL FLANAESS ADVENTURES
CENTRAL FLANAESS CULTURE The dual threats of Iuz and Elemental Evil pres-
The culture of the Central Flanaess is a result of the ent abundant opportunities for adventure in the
long imposition of the Great Kingdom's rule over a Central Flanaess (see “Greyhawk Conflicts” in this
variety ofpeoples living in close proximity. These chapter). This region is particularly appropriate for
peoples, by and large, share the Great Kingdom's, campaigns flavored with epic fantasy, supernatu-
practical, hardworking values, and they rely on. ral horror, or war (see “Flavors of Fantasy” in this
the family and local community, rather than the chapter). This region is also home to many of the
might of nations and armies. They have a strong most famous dungeons and ruins of Greyhawk, in-
egalitarian streak unlike the Great Kingdom's strict cluding those described in the sections that follow.
social hierarchy, and (beyond the domains of luz

CHAPTER 5 | CREYHAWK

Ghost Tower of Inverness. Ages ago, an archmage SHAR
raised the mighty fortress of Inverness from the Fanatical Suloise militarists called the Scarlet Order
very rock of the Abbor-Alz. In the great inner tower founded the Hidden Empire of Shar, which is closed
of the keep, he hid his most prized possession: the to outsiders. The order controls the peninsula west
Soul-Gem. Legend says this great white diamond of the Tilva Strait, as far north as the Vast Swamp.
fell from the sky and glowed with the brilliance See “Factions and Organizations” in this chapter for
of the sun, and its magic could drag mortal souls more about the Scarlet Order.
screaming from their bodies and trap them. The
fortress was ruined long ago, but on foggy nights EASTERN FLANAESS CULTURE
the great central tower still appears. ‘The culture of the Eastern Flanaess is largely that
Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth. The archmage Iggwilv of the ancient Aerdi tribe of humans that conquered
is said to have acquired much of her prowess from the region and established the Great Kingdom al-
the hidden magic she discovered within the Lost most 800 years ago. The Aerdi valued common
Caverns of Tsojeanth (pronounced SAWJ-kahn). sense, hard work, and knowing one’s place in a
In these caverns she conducted experiments and strict social order. Having claimed their position of
rituals to increase her powers. One of these rituals power through conquest, they put great emphasis
led to her downfall, though, when she accidentally on military power and martial skill. These values
freed the demon lord Graz’zt from the prison where persist throughout the region, reinforced in the
she had bound him. Though Graz’zt fled to the Great Kingdom by strict laws and even stricter
Abyss, Iggwilv was weakened and forced to aban- social mores.
don the caverns, but a secret cache of her treasure These same values persist in many of the lands
is said to remain. The Lost Caverns of Tsojeanth are resisting the overking’s reign. Nyrond and Almor,
detailed in Quests from the Infinite Staircase. in particular, share the stratified social structure of
‘Maure Castle. Maure Castle is a forlorn and fore- the Great Kingdom, with their king and prelate re-
boding place surrounded by boggy ground and maining distant from the common people they rule.
scraggly trees. Rumors suggest that a tome holding The independent states of the Iron League are more
eldritch lore of unimaginable evil is held within, egalitarian, sharing that trait with the peoples of
guarded by a powerful demon. the Central Flanaess,
‘Temple of Elemental Evil. The Temple of Elemental Typical clothing in the Eastern Flanaess is a tunic
Evil, built long ago, spawned hordes of bloodthirsty ofvarying length, often worn with trousers, with a
monsters that ravaged the lands between Celene cape or cloak. The fabrics ofthe east are often pat-
and Veluna. As far as anyone in the area knows, the terned with checks or plaids, with different patterns
temple is currently abandoned and has not posed a often relating to the wearer's lineage. Eastern cui-
threat since the Battle of Emridy Meadows in 569 sine pairs rice and potatoes with a variety of meats,
CY, but the forces of good in the region keep vig- especially seafood,
ilant against any sign that the temple and its cults
EASTERN FLANAESS AND ITs NEIGHBORS
might arise once more.
‘The Duchy and County of Urnst bridge the regions
EASTERN FLANAESS of the Central and Eastern Flanaess. Once part of
the Great Kingdom's province of Nyrond, they de-
Once a powerful force for order and good, the
clared their independence from the Great Kingdom
Great Kingdom of Aerdy has declined over the last
and the new Kingdom of Nyrond at the same time,
century to a state of utter decadence. The reign-
achieving their separation from Nyrond with min-
ing overking—Ivid V, patriarch of the House of
imal bloodshed. While the people of Urnst distrust
Naelax—is rumored to have fiendish advisers as well
the king of Nyrond, they don’t hate him like they do
as a noble court infested with evil. Ruling from the
the overking.
Malachite Throne in Rauxes, Ivid commands an
The proximity of the Nyr Dyv, the Cairn Hills,
unmatched army currently embroiled in two wars
and the Shield Lands means the Urnst lands can't
at once: one against the Kingdom of Nyrond and
ignore the rising threat of luz or the politics of the
the Prelacy of Almor, and the other against the Iron
Free City of Greyhawk. At the same time, Nyrond
League (consisting of Idee, Irongate, the Lordship
stands as a buffer between Urnst and the Great
ofthe Isles, Onnwal, and Sunndi). To pay for these
Kingdom, but the overking’s threat still looms. The
costly wars, the overking has imposed heavy taxes
duke and countess of Urnst believe that a united
on his subjects, further diminishing his popularity.
Urnst will stand more strongly against pressures
Aerdiaak, Ablissa, Medegia, and Rel Astra are
from east and west, which they hope to achieve
provinces and fiefs of the Great Kingdom. The Sea
through the marriage of Countess Belissica Gellor
Baronies are vassal states that provide most of the
to Byron Lorinar, eldest son of Duke Jalken Lorinar.
kingdom's navy.

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

_ EASTERN FLANAESS LOCATIONS
Location Ruler Description

Aerdiaak Herzog Varz Grenell North province ofthe Great Kingdom, ruled by a cousin of
(human) the overking; its court is rife with debauchery and intrigue
Ahlissa Herzogin Seprenna Calyn South province ofthe Great Kingdom, ruled by a cousin of
(human) the overking; embroiled in war with the Iron League
Almor, the Prelacy of Prelate Xanther Klimstyn Theocracy ruled by a priest of Pelor who declared indepen-
(human) dence when the Great Kingdom descended into evil
Bone March, the Fallen territory of the Great Kingdom, now held by armies
from Almor and Nyrond
Celadon Forest Ancient forest protected by druidic circles and fey
Flinty Hills and Home to several independent communities with no great
Gamboge Forest love for Nyrond or the Pale
Great Kingdom, the Overking Ivid V (human) Unspeakably evil monarchy
Idee Count Vasiliek Donsten Independent fiefdom; member of the Iron League
(human)
lrongate (Free City) Mayor Unthera Selvich Thriving metropolis; member ofthe Iron League; the
(appears as a dwarf) ‘mayor is a disguised adult bronze dragon

Lordship of the Isles, the Princess Ronthal II Independent principality; member ofthe Iron League
(human)

Medegia, the See of Holy Censor Starvik Jerel ‘Theocratic fiefdom ruled by a priest whose power is
(human) rumored to come from pacts with archdevils
Nyrond, the Kingdom of King Dunstan | (human) Center ofresistance to the Great Kingdom

Onnwal The Raven of Onnwal, Independent state; member of the Iron League
Zyl Grayshadow (dwarf)
Pale, the Theocracy Supreme Prelate Ogon Theocracy ruled by a priest of Pholtus
ofthe Till (human)

Rel Astra, City of Constable Mayor Drax Independent fief plotting in secret against the Great King-
(ore) dom, hoping to ally with Medegia or the Sea Baronies

Sea Baronies, the Four sea barons, includ- Independent island fiefdoms that serve as the Great
ing High Admiral Kalashe Kingdom's navy
Asperdi (human)
Shar, the Hidden Father of Obedience Isolated order ofSuloise militants whose spies operate
Empire of Korenth Zan (human?) across the Flanaess
Spindrift Isles, the The Council of Five (on Independent islands that keep watchful eyes on aggressive
the northern islands) and island neighbors
the Council of Seven (on
the southern island)

Sunndi Steward Valenta (elf) Independent fiefdomn; member of the Iron League
Tenh, the Duchy of Duchess Ehliyah Raynar Independent fiefdom allied with Nyrond for defense
Il (human) against luz

Umnst, the County of Countess Belissica Gellor Independent fiefdom
(human)

Urnst, the Duchy of Duke Jalken Lorinar Independent fiefdom
(human)

Vast Swamp, the Morass separating the Tilvanot Peninsula and Shar from
the rest of the East

CHAP
5 | CREYHAWK
TER / 165 _

s ADVENTURES monsters, and rich and magical treasures. Some-
The story of the Eastern Flanaess is a tale of where within rests the demilich Acererak, who
ruled much of the region long ago. The demilich is
said to take perverse pleasure in devouring adven-
rupt and decadent empire. This story lends itself
to turers’ souls.
campaigns exploring themes of supernatural hor- The Tomb of Horrors is detailed in Tales from the
ror (in the fiend-haunted courts of the overking), Yawning Portal.
swashbuckling (in the cities across the region as Troll Fens. The chilly misofts
the Troll Fens, lo-
well as the eastern seas), and w “ lavors of cated against the shoulders of the Griff Mountains
Fantasy” in this chapter), and the Rakers at the head of the Yol River, cloaka
Havens of Unrest. Those who despise and chal place of unnameable horrors. As the name impli
lenge the Great Kingdom's oppression—outlaws the fens are infested with particularly large and
both good and bad—find refuge in borderlands just vi olls. The Pale carefully hedges the place
beyond the reach of the overking’s soldiers. These with watchtowers and keeps, and strong patrols
clude the woods and swamp near Rel Astra (the ride the verges of the southern end of the Troll Fens
eastern reaches of the Grandwood Forest and the to watch for unwelcome visits from the monsters
Lone Heath) and the Hestmark Highlands east of dwelling within.
Sunndi. The outlaws in the Grandwood include
significant numbers of elves and halflings as well
NORTHERN FLANAESS
as humans, while those in the Hestmar! The northern region of the Flanaess includes three
include dwarves and gnomes distinct areas populated by different peoples: the
Tomb of Horrors. Deep within the Vast Swamp is Baklunish horse riders of the Chakyik and the
the sinister Tomb of Horrors—a labyrinthine -gwiur, the Suloise people of the North King-
filled with terrible traps, strange and ferocious doms, and the Flan nomads of the Hunting Lands

Tue Toms oF Honors Lies veer
eran THE Vasr Swa
me.

BAKLUNISH NOMADS coniferous forests, and deep fjords, The kingdoms
The Chakyik and Wegwiur—called Tiger Nomads are named for the three distinct tribal lines that
and Wolf Nomads, respectively, by their neighbors— inhabit them: the Cruski (whose name means “ice
are horse riders of Baklunish descent who dwell on the Fruzti (“frost”), and the Schnai (“snow”).
the steppes north of the Yatil Mountains and Lake The Schnai are strong and numerous. When
Quag. The climate in the steppes and pine forests Queen Ingrid of the Schnai has a mind to raid the
ranges from cool to frigid. Both peoples maintain isles of the Sea Baronies or the coasts of Aerdiaak
scattered trading outposts that welcome visitors and the Great Kingdom, she calls upon the king of
from neighboring and distant lands. the Fruzti and the queen of the Cruski to join her
The steppe nomads have a rich storytelling tradi- army. King Hundgred of the Fruzti has no choice
tion that reinforces a strong sense of clan identity but to honor his oath to the Schnai, while Queen
and family line within the clan. Their tales include Tharla of the Cruski rarely turns down a chance to
stories not only of heroes within their clans, but attack her enemies, At other times, the Cruski raid
also of heroic horses, and the nomads trace equine the Fruzti, the Schnai, or the Hold of Stonefist.
lineages as carefully as their own. These nomads As their distinct kingdoms suggest, the people of
maintain the traditions of their people, many of the North Kingdoms value their connection to their
which can be traced back to the ancient Baklunish clan lineage. They preserve a love of learning from
empire. their distant ancestors of the Suel Imperium, and
The Baklunish nomads favor bright pastel col- they value knowledge of the natural world as highly
ors in gowns and robes. When traveling or at war, as they do the skills of hunting, sailing, and war-
though, they prefer more rugged gear of leather fare. Their clothing includes shirts and pants made
and hide. of wool, augmented with furs, capes, mittens, and
‘warm boots. They often wear large pins, brooches
Tue Nortu Kincpoms ,
or emblems in their cloaks as a sign of wealth or
Three kingdoms of related peoples occupy the Thill-
accomplishment,
onrian Peninsula in the northeast of the Flanaess—a
beautiful subarctic landscape of high mountains,

NORTHERN FLANAESS LOCATIONS
Location Ruler Description
‘Arn, the Archbarony of Archbaron of Amn (identity Remote and little-known region located near a ruined
unknown) castle with monster-filled dungeons
Bandit Kingdoms, the Four to six bandit lords Feuding kingdoms ruled by greedy bandit lords with
private armies
Barren Wastes, the = — Harsh, despoiled land where dragons roam and some-

times go to die

q
Chakyik Lord Agu! Krusef (human) Land of the Tiger Nomads—horse riders with scattered
trading outposts
Hunting Lands, the Overlord-Protector Home to Flan nomads, known to their neighbors as the
Yhareen Sakarr (tiefling) Rovers of the Barrens

North Kingdom ofthe Queen Tharla of the Fierce, seafaring berserkers of the North Kingdoms
Cruski, the Cruski (human)
North Kingdom of the King Hundgred of the Weakest of the three North Kingdoms, having suffered
Fruzti, the Fruzti (human) great losses battling in the Bone March
North Kingdom of the Queen Ingrid of the Strongest and most populated of the North Kingdoms
Schnai, the Schnai (human)

Ratik, the Barony of Baron Lexnol Haarkof Former province ofthe Great Kingdom tryi 1g to ally with
(human) the North Kingdoms
Stonefist, The Hold of King Sevvord Redbeard of Monarchy founded by a bandit leader who attracted
the Hold (human) malcontents from many nations

E
Wegwiur Wolf-Mother Bargra Land of the Wolf Nomads—horse riders engaged in war
Yefkos (human) against luz

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK /

mane”
161

AOVENTURERS IN THE NoaTH KINGDOMS HELP A

Ta Huntine Lanps north, the Horned Society and the Shield Lands
‘The People of the Hunting Lands (called Rovers of in the Central Flanaess, and the Duchy of Tenh in
the Barrens by their neighbors) have a history of the east. No single bandit lord is powerful enough
raiding the outskirts of Furyondy, the Bandit King- to conquer the whole territory, and the combined
doms, Tenh, and Wegwiur, which hasn't won them strength of all is often required to defend against
many allies. The nomads’ legendary dominance of retaliation by neighboring states for the bandit
the north has faded, as the forces of Iuz and the lords’ aggression. At least one of the bandit lords,
Horned Society wage steady war against them Renfus the Mottled (ruler of Stoink), is wholly in
while raiders from the Hold of Stonefist prey on the the service of luz.
Hunting Lands farther east. Many of the Rovers’ Ratik. As a former province of the Great Kingdom,
mightiest warriors—the Wardogs—have perished in Ratik rides the boundary between the northern and
battles against all these relentless foes. eastern regions of the Flanaess. Without the protec-
The people of the Hunting Lands value a close tion of the Great Kingdom, Ratik has been forced to
connection to the natural world. They view nature defend itself against frequent raids from the North
as an entity to be respected, not controlled, and Kingdoms and the Sea Baronies, as well as attacks
their myths and legends teach the value of accept- from mountain-dwelling monsters. Baron Lexnol
ing nature's bounty as a gift that evokes gratitude. Haarkof’s emissaries hope to forge an alliance with
They wear clothes made entirely of animal skins, the North Kingdoms and redirect the berserkers’
including belts, capes, robes, and slippers, and deco- aggressions toward the Hold of Stonefist.
rate their skin with paints and tattoos. Wegwiur. Wolf-Mother Bargra Yefkos of the We-
gwiur Hordes is preoccupied with the threat of luz,
NorTHERN FLANAESS AND ITs NEIGHBORS
and she meets frequently with clan leaders and Per-
The regions of the north exist on the fringes of renlander mercenaries to strategize. The Wegwiur
other regions of the Flanaess. Three realms are the
consider their territory to extend to the Dulsi River,
primary points of intersection between the North-
so they fiercely defend the western Howling Hills
ern Flanaess and neighboring areas.
from the incursion ofthe hideous monsters that i
Bandit Kingdoms. The Bandit Kingdoms is a law- serve luz. Several large battles between Wegwiur F
less frontier between the Hunting Lands in the
and the forces of luz have taken place in that area.

Otp KEOLAND Locations
Location Ruler Description
Bissel, the March of Margrave Imran Rendulkar Bone of contention between Keoland, Veluna, and Ket
(human)

Geoff, the Grand Grand Duchess Owena Isolated fiefdom with a long history of battling giants in
Duchy of Blackthorn (human) the nearby mountains
Gran March, the Commandant Magnus Nominal vassal of Keoland and ally with Bissel; the com-
Onyxbeard (dwarf) mandant is elected from among the March’s noble houses
Hold of the Sea Prince Zygmund Ill of Independent oligarchy of sea traders founded by bucca-
Princes, the Monmurg (human) neers; now a powerful naval force
Keoland, the King Kimbertos Skotti Heart of the Old Keoland region, surrounded by friendly
Kingdom of (human) neighbors that swear fealty to Keoland’s monarch
Lortmil Mountains, the — Natural border between the Old Keoland region and the
Central Flanaess

Sterich, the March of — Marquise Quercha Nominal vassal state of Keoland, but its ruler is more like
Emondav (human) a sister than a vassal to the king of Keoland

Ulek, the County of Countess Lewenn Richfield Former vassal of Keoland
(human)
Ulek, the Duchy of Duke Grenowin (elf) Former vassal of Keoland with a large population of elves
Ulek, the Principality of Princess Olynn Corond Fiefdom with a significant navy; its princess commands
(dwarf) the respect of many dwarves beyond Ulek

Valley of the Mage, the The Mage ofthe Valley Secluded refuge of an ancient archmage; current inhabi-
(identity unknown) tants unknown,

Yeomanry, the Freeholder Vyndi Skyspear Independent republic governed by an elected freeholder
(goliath)

NorTHERN FLANAESS ADVENTURES Op KEOLAND CULTURE
‘The cold north is an ideal location for a campaign Old Keoland is a diverse region ofthe Flanaess
featuring themes of sword-and-sorcery fantasy (see where different cultures have mingled for many
“Flavors of Fantasy” in this chapter). The peoples of centuries. Keolish folk often garden, maintain close
the Northern Flanaess battle giants, dragons, and family ties, have a down-to-earth nature, and love
other horrific monsters in equally dangerous envi- storytelling.
ronments, while remaining suspicious of the deca- The clothes worn in Old Keoland tend toward
dence of the cities and nations of the south. loose-fitting shirts and wide-legged pants, volu-
minous cloaks for cold or wet weather, and sturdy
Op KEOLAND boots. This region's cuisine represents a fusion of
United by their shared history as part of the ancient Central Flan dishes of rice, potato, and meat with
Kingdom of Keoland, the marches and fiefdoms some spices and seasonings brought from the west,
between the Lortmil Mountains and the higher creating unique flavors.
mountains to the west gather diverse populations of
many different species in relative peace with each OLp KEOLAND AND Irs NEIGHBORS
other. Even the long-standing feud between Keoland The long chain of the Lortmil Mountains forms a

and the Hold of the Sea Princes might be drawing natural barrier between Old Keoland and the region

to an end under the leadership of Keoland’s current of the Central Flanaess. The mountains contain
ruler, King Kimbertos Skotti. The region enjoys a some of the richest gem and precious metal de-

‘warm, mild climate but faces many threats from posits in Eastern Oerik. The humans, dragonborn,
dwarves, gnomes, halflings, goblinoids, goliaths, and
monstrous foes.
ores that live in these mountains and their foothills
are subjects of the realms that surround the moun-
tain range, but they often band together to deal
with greater threats on both sides of the mountains.

CHAPTER 5 | GREYHAWK

Benearw rwe seauri re

Oxp KEOLAND ADVENTURES connect to the Underdark, wherein lie hidden cities,
One reason for the amicable relations among the strongholds, and temples harboring terrible evil.
nations of Old Keoland is the danger posed by drag- Jotens. Hill giants, manticores, and wyverns from
‘ons, giants, and other monsters found throughout the Jotens regularly threaten the tranquility of both
the region. That makes this region particularly well Sterich and the Yeomanry.
suited to a heroic fantasy campaign (see “Flavors Rushmoors. Hungry black dragons, otyughs, and
of Fantasy” in this chapter). The most dangerous other monsters haunt the Rushmoors.
places include those described below.
Barrier Peaks. These forbidding highlands are WESTERN FLANAESS
home to strange monsters. “Expedition to the Bar- Survivors of the Invoked Devastation that
rier Peaks,” an adventure in Quests from the Infinite
destroyed the ancient Baklunish empire settled the
Staircase, explores the origin of these monsters. temperate prairies, forests, and coastal lands of
Crystalmist Mountains. Giants, white dragons, and the Western Flanaess about a thousand years ago.
other monsters frequently descend from the Crys- Largely separated from the rest of the Flanaess
talmist Mountains into Geoff and Sterich, searching by the Yatils, the Barrier Peaks, and the Crystal-
for food and plunder. An ancient tunnel stretches mist Mountains, these realms are a stronghold of
from the western end of the Yeomanry into the Sea Baklunish cultures.
of Dust, attracting many adventurers to explore The nations of Ekbir, Tusmit, and Zeif represent
its lengths. the heart ofthe region, and two rivers—the Blashik-
Dim Forest. Though elves inhabit the western mung and the Tuflik—form natural borders between
part of the Dim Forest, the eastern part is wild and them. Although the nations currently enjoy peace-
3 prowled by monsters, including green dragons.
ful relations, Tusmit profits by playing its political
Hellfurnaces. The Hellfurnaces are a volcanically neighbors against each other—Ekbir against Zeif,
active extension of the Crystalmist Mountains Zeif against the Ulakandar nomads, the Ulakandar
populated with threats including fire giants and red nomads against Ket, and so forth, Pasha Qharlan
dragons. Beneath the mountains are labyrinths that
Sylba of Tusmit is careful to keep his name well

CHAPTER
5 | GREYHAWK

WESTERN FLANAESS LOCATIONS
Location Ruler Description

Dry Steppes, the Desert where the Baklunish empire once stood

Ekbir, the Sultanate of Sultan Xargun I (aasimar) Monarchy in an uneasy peace with its neighbors, bracing
for a rumored invasion from Zeif

Ket Beygraf Zoltana Lhaz Crossroads region
(human)

Plains of the Various Ulakandar clan Land of the Ulakandar nomads, who roam between the
Ulakandar, the leaders Dry Steppes and the border of Zeif

Sea of Dust, the ae Wasteland where the Suel Imperium once stood
Tusmit, the Pashalik of Pasha Qharlan Sylba Monarchy profiting by playing its neighbors against each
(human) other
ull Orakhan Drasika Borinok Independent fiefdom founded by Ulakandar nomads who
(human) settled the land
Zeif, the Sultanate of Sultan Naxas Murad Monarchy ruled by a reclusive philosopher who resists his
(human) advisers’ call to imperial expansion

clear ofthese schemes so he can avoid embroiling both Bissel (and the lands of Old Keoland) and Ve-
‘Tusmit in open warfare. But Tusmit's spies are cur~ luna (and the Central Flanaess) makes it a vibrant,
rently causing discord by spreading rumors that multicultural land rich from extensive trade. Its
Zeif is planning to invade Ekbir. Ekbir's sultan be- culture reflects the breadth of its trade, including
lieves the rumors are true and is readying his army. sizable populations of dragonborn and tieflings and
Sultan Naxas Murad of Zeif
is a reclusive man, a displaying a fusion of Baklunish and Oeridian influ-
great philosopher, and a stern father figure to the ence. This mixture is visible in the title of its ruler,
rulers of Ekbir and Tusmit. Over the years, advisers which is a combination of a Baklunish title (bey)
and family members have urged Naxas to expand and an Oeridian one (graf). The beygraf is a noble
Zeif's borders through military conquest, but he re- chosen by the lords of Lopolla's wealthiest, most
fuses to do so, citing failed land grabs by kingdoms influential families. Many of these lords also serve
through history as proof that imperial expansion as generals in the Kettish military. The current
across the Flanaess rarely ends well. beygraf, Zoltana Lhaz, is a skilled diplomat who so
far has balanced the interests of different forces
WESTERN FLANAESS CULTURE
both inside her nation and among her neighbors.
The culture of the Western Flanaess preserves
many of the ways and traditions of the ancient WESTERN FLANAESS ADVENTURES
Baklunish empire. Enormous value is placed on the ‘The political and mercantile intrigue among Ekbir,
virtues of hospitality and generosity, particularly ‘Tusmit, and Zeif provides abundant adventure op-
almsgiving and pious donations to temples and portunities for characters in the Western Flanaess.
clergy. Since the fall of their ancient empire, the ‘A campaign focused around intrigue or mystery
people of the Western Flanaess have demonstrated (sce “Flavors of Fantasy” in this chapter) works par-
more interest in trade—as a way of amassing power ticularly well in this region.
and wealth, but also as a means of connecting and Of course, the Western Flanaess has its fair share
coexisting with neighbors—than in imperial expan- of monsters, dungeons, and ruins as well. The ruins
sion or military domination. of the Baklunish Empire in the Dry Steppes, and
‘The clothing favored by the people of the Western those of the Suel Imperium in the Sea of Dust, at-
Flanaess features bright patterns in vibrant colors, tract plenty of adventurers as well as villains hoping
worn in flowing gowns, robes, and long coats worn to claim the magical knowledge that caused the
with breeches. Their cuisine is renowned for its rich terrible catastrophes leading to the fall of those em-
flavors and spiciness. pires. Ket and Ul, too, suffer from the depredations
of the monsters in the Barrier Peaks and the Yatil
WESTERN FLANAESS AND ITs NEIGHBORS
Mountains, just as their eastern neighbors do.
Ket is the crossroads between the Western Flanaess
and the rest of the continent, nestled between the
Yatil Mountains and Barrier Peaks. Though it was
founded by Baklunish settlers, Ket’s proximity to

CHAPTER 5|GREYHAWK / 171

CHAPTER 6

COSMOLOGY
T HE WORLDS OF D&D ARE PART OF AN Since the primary way of traveling from plane to
immense cosmos. Most campaigns and plane is through magical portals, the spatial rela-
adventures play out on worlds on the tionship between different planes is largely theoret-
Material Plane. The rest of the multiverse consists ical. No being in the multiverse can look down and
of different planes of existence defined in relation to see the planes arranged like a diagram in a book. No
the Material Plane. mortal can verify whether Mount Celestia is sand-
The planes of existence are strange and often dan- wiched between Bytopia and Arcadia; rather, this
gerous environments undreamed of in the natural theoretical positioning is based on the philosophical
world, Adventurers can stroll along streets of fire, shading among the three planes and the relative im-
test their mettle on battlefields where the fallen are portance they give to law and good.
resurrected with each dawn, and behold the terri
ing majesty of the Lady of Pain as she floats above OTHER CONFIGURATIONS
the streets of the ring-shaped city at the center of For your campaign, you can use a different model of
the multiverse. the planes. Here are several examples:

+ Planes situated among the roots and branches ofa
THE PLANES great cosmic tree (literally or figuratively)
‘The planes of existence are realms of myth and + Material realms suspended between two other re-
mystery. They're not simply other worlds, but alities: the astral realms (the Astral Plane and the
dimensions formed and governed by spiritual and Outer Planes) above and the elemental realms (the
elemental principles. They fall into the following Inner Planes) below
categories: + A cosmology with fewer planes: a Material Plane;
the Transitive Planes; a single undifferentiated
Material Realms. Most D&D worlds are located on
Elemental Plane, where all four elements churn
the Material Plane, which has two planar echoes:
in chaos; an Overheaven, where good deities and
the Feywild and the Shadowfell,
Celestials dwell; and an Underworld, where evil
Transitive Planes. The Ethereal Plane and the
deities and Fiends reside
Astral Plane are boundless realms that provide
Planes arranged in a complex system of orbits,
passage between other planes of existence.
with planes exerting greater influence on the
Inner Planes. The four Elemental Planes (Air,
Material Plane the closer they draw to it
Earth, Fire, and Water), plus the Para-elemental
Planes between them, are the Inner Planes. MATERIAL REALMS
Outer Planes. Seventeen Outer Planes correspond
The Material Plane is where the philosophical and
to the nine alignments and shades of philosophical
elemental forces ofthe other planes of existence
difference between them.
collide in the jumbled existence of mortal life and
Positive and Negative Planes. These two planes
matter. It is a thoroughly magical place, reflected
enfold the rest of the cosmology, providing the
in the two planes that share its central place in the
raw forces of life and death that underlie all exis-
multiverse.
tence in the multiverse.
The Feywild and the Shadowfell are parallel di-
THE GREAT WHEEL mensions occupying the same cosmological space
as the Material Plane. The landscapes of these three
The default D&D cosmology includes more than planes are similar, but those of the Feywild are
two dozen planes, detailed in this chapter. The most,
more marvelous and whimsical, while those of the
‘common understanding of these planes visualizes
Shadowfell are more bleak and ominous. Passage
them as a group of concentric wheels, with the
between the Material Plane and these other realms
material realms at the center. The Inner Planes form
is sometimes effortless, even accidental. Adven-
a wheel around the Material Plane, enveloped in the
turers might enter a grove oftrees on the Material
Ethereal Plane. Then the Outer Planes form another
Plane and suddenly find themselves in a lush, col-
wheel around and behind (or above or below) that
orful forest on the Feywild or a grim wood of dead
one, arranged according to alignment, with the
trees on the Shadowfell.
Outlands linking them all.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 173

INNER PLANES OUTER PLANES
The Inner Planes surround the Material Plane Ifthe Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy
and its echoes, providing the raw elemental sub- that make up the multiverse, the Outer Planes
stance from which all worlds were made. The four provide the direction, thought, and purpose for its
Elemental Planes~Air, Earth, Fire, and Water— construction. These are realms ofspirituality and
form a ring around the Material Plane. The bor- thought, the spheres where Celestials, Fiends, and
der regions between these planes are sometimes deities dwell. The plane of Elysium, for example,
described as distinct planes in their own right: the isn't merely a home for good creatures or where
Para-elemental Planes. spirits of good creatures go when they die. It is the
These realms exemplify the physical essence and embodiment of goodness, a spiritual realm where
elemental nature of air, earth, fire, and water. The evil can't abide. It is as much a state of being and of
entire substance of the Elemental Plane of Fire, for mind as it is a physical location.
example, is suffused with the fundamental nature of When discussing anything to do with deities and
fire: energy, passion, transformation, and destruc- their realms, the language used must be highly
tion. Even objects of solid brass or basalt seem to
metaphorical. Their actual homes aren't literally
dance with flame in a manifestation of the vibrancy places at all but exemplify the idea that the Outer
of fire's dominion, Planes are realms of thought and spi
At their innermost edges, where they are concep- The planes with an element of good in their na-
tually closest to the Material Plane, the four Ele- ture are called the Upper Planes, while those with
mental Planes and the four Para-elemental Planes an element of evil are the Lower Planes. A plane's
resemble places on the Material Plane. The four alignment (as shown in the Outer Planes table) is
elements mingle together as they do on the Material its essence, and a creature whose alignment doesn't
Plane, forming land, sea, and sky. But the dominant match the plane's alignment experiences a sense of
element strongly influences the environment, alter- dissonance there. When a good creature visits Ely-
ing those locations’ fundamental qualities. sium, for example, it feels in tune with the plane, but
‘The inhabitants of this inner ring include aarako- an evil creature feels uncomfortable,
cra, azers, dragon turtles, gargoyles, genies, lizard-
folk, mephits, salamanders, and xorn. Some orig- Outer PLANES
inated on the Material Plane, and all can travel to
Outer Plane Alignment
the Material Plane (if they have access to the magic
required) and survive there.
Abyss Chaotic Evil
As the Elemental Planes extend farther from the Acheron Lawful Evil, Lawful Neutral
Material Plane, they become increasingly unstable Arborea Chaotic Good
and hostile. In the outer regions, the elements exist,
Arcadia Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral
in their purest form: great expanses of solid earth,
blazing fire, crystal-clear water, and unsullied air. Beastlands Chaotic Good, Neutral Good
Any foreign substance is extremely rare; little air Bytopia Lawful Good, Neutral Good
can be found in the outer reaches ofthe Plane of Carceri Chaotic Evil, Neutral Evil
Earth, and earth is all but impossible to find in the
Elysium Neutral Good
outer reaches of the Plane of Fire. These areas are
much less hospitable to travelers from the Material Gehenna Lawful Evil, Neutral Evil
Plane than the border regions are. Such regions are Hades Neutral Evil
little known, so one who mentions the Plane of Fire, Limbo Chaotic Neutral
for example, usually means the border region.
The outer regions are the domains of creatures
Mechanus Lawful Neutral
formed of the pure elements, including air, earth, Mount Celestia Lawful Good
fire, and water elementals. These are also the do- Nine Hells Lawful Evil
mains of the Elemental Princes of Evil—primordial
beings of pure elemental fury.
Outlands Neutral
At the outermost extents of the Elemental Planes, Pandemonium Chaotic Evil, Chaotic Neutral
the pure elements dissolve and bleed together Ysgard Chaotic Good, Chaotic Neutral
into an unending tumult of clashing energies and
The Upper Planes are the home of Celestials. The
colliding substance called the Elemental Chaos.
Lower Planes are the home of Fiends. The planes in
Elementals can be found here as well, but they usu-
ally don't stay long, preferring the comfort of their
native planes. ple, modrons are Constructs that inhabit Mechanus,
and slaadi are Aberrations that thrivein Limbo.

174 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

Glam

tg

Bean

S naeeas Pusie Mom

osc

As with the Elemental Planes, one can imagine drawn to acts of cruelty or betrayal. Those who
the perceptible part of the Outer Planes as a border spend time on Mechanus and other lawful planes
region, while extensive spiritual regions lie beyond might feel their ties of loyalty to each other growing
ordinary sensory experience. Even in perceptible stronger, while those who visit Limbo and other
regions, appearances can be deceptive. Initially, an chaotic planes might become temporarily more
Outer Plane might appear hospitable and familiar independent or self-absorbed. These tendencies are
to natives of the Material Plane. But the landscape best handled as DM suggestions and then roleplayed
can change at the whim of
a deity or other powerful by the players, but you might award Heroic Inspira-
forces that dwell on the plane, which can remake tion to characters who bring these characteristics
the realm completely, erasing and rebuilding exis- tolfe in their characters.
tence to better fulfill those forces’ needs. Planar Dissonance. Celestials who visit the Lower
Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the Planes and Fiends who visit the Upper Planes ex-
Outer Planes. A perceptible region ofa plane might perience significant discomfort if their visits last
seem quite small on one visit, and on another trip more than a few hours. After finishing a Long Rest
can stretch on to what seems like infinity. Adven- ona plane that is alien to its nature, a Celestial or
turers could take a guided tour of the Nine Hells, Fiend makes a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On
from the first layer to the ninth, in a single day—if a failed save, whenever the creature makes a D20
the powers of the Nine Hells desire it. Or it could Test, the creature must subtract 1d4 from the roll.
take weeks for travelers to make a grueling trek ‘The effect is cumulative with each failed save and
across a single layer. ends when the creature finishes a Long Rest on a
plane that isn’t opposed to its nature.
Layers OF THE OUTER PLANES
Most Outer Planes include a number of distinct
realms. These environments are often imagined as a
PLANAR TRAVEL
stack of related parts of the same plane, so travelers When adventurers travel to other planes of ex-
refer to them as layers. For example, Mount Celes- istence, they undertake a legendary journey in
tia resembles a sacred mountain with seven great which they might face supernatural guardians and
plateaus along its ascent, the Nine Hells is like a pit undergo many ordeals. The nature of that journey

where the River Styx plunges down through nine and the trials along the way depend in part on the
tiers, and the Abyss has a seemingly endless number means of travel, such as magical portals or spells.
of layers.
PLANAR PoRTALS
Like the planes themselves, the description of
layers is highly metaphorical and subject to varying A portal isa stationary, interplanar connection that
interpretations. The plane of Carceri, for example, links a specific location on one plane of existence to
has been described as a long series of spherical a specific location on another. Some portals func-
worlds arranged like beads on a string, with each tion like doorways, appearinas
g a clear window or
sphere consisting of six nested spheres—the layers a fog-shrouded passage, and interplanar travel is as
of the plane. This fanciful description is but one simple as moving through the portal. Other portals
attempt to make sense of the distorted geography of are locations~circles of standing stones, soaring
a place that isn't even a place in the ordinary sense towers, sailing ships, or even whole towns—that
of the word, but an alternate state of reality. exist on multiple planes at once or flicker from one
Most portals from elsewhere reach the first layer plane to another. Some are vortices, joining an
ofa multilayered plane. This layer is depicted as the Elemental Plane with a very similar location on the
top or bottom layer, depending on the plane. As the Material Plane, such as a swirling pool of magma in
arrival point for most visitors, the first layer fune- the heart of a volcano (leading to the Plane of Fire)
tions like an antechamber for that plane. or a maelstrom in the depths of the ocean (leading
to the Plane of Water).
ALIGNMENT AND THE OUTER PLANES Passing through a planar portal can be the sim-
‘The Outer Planes are realms of thought and moral- plest way to travel from the Material Plane to a
ity more than merely physical reality, and they can
desired location on another plane. Often, though, a
affect visitors on a deeply personal level as well as a portal presents an adventure in itselE.
physical one. First, the adventurers must find a portal that leads
At your discretion, a creature that spends a long where they want to go. Most portals exist in distant
time on an Outer Plane that is not its home plan can
locations, and a portal's location often has thematic
begin to take on aspects of that plane's ethos. Vis- similarities to the plane it leads to. For example,
itors to the Upper Planes might feel strange urges a portal to Mount Celestia might be located on a
to perform deeds of kindness or compassion, while mountain peak.
visitors to the Lower Planes might find themselves

176 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

Second, portals often have guardians charged ‘TRAVELING THE OUTER PLANES
with ensuring that certain creatures don’t pass
Described in the sections that follow are four planar
through. A portal’s guardian is typically a powerful
features that connect multiple Outer Planes:
magical creature, such as a djinni, a sphinx, a titan,
or an inhabitant of the portal’s destination plane. + The Infinite Staircase
Finally, most portals aren't open all the time, but + The River Oceanus
open only in particular situations or when a certain + The River Styx
requirement is met. A portal can have any require- + Yggdrasil, the World Tree
‘ment, but the following are the most common:
Other planar crossings might exist in your cam-
Command. The portal functions only if a particular paign, or it might be possible to walk (or journey
‘command is given. A command is usually a word aboard a wondrous train or similar vehicle) from
that can be invoked in any language (including a one plane to another in your cosmology.
signed language). Sometimes the command must
INFINITE STAIRCASE
be given as a character passes through the portal,
(which is otherwise a mundane doorway, window,
‘The Infinite Staircase is an extradimensional stair-
case that connects the planes. An entrance to the
or similar opening). Other portals open when the
‘command is given within 15 feet of themselves, Infinite Staircase usually appears as a nondescript
door. Beyond the portal lies a small landing with a
and they remain open for Id12 minutes.
Key Item. The portal functions if the traveler car- stairway leading up and down. The Infinite Stair-
ries a particular object; the item acts much like a ‘case changes appearance as it climbs and descends,
key toa door. This item can be a common object going from simple stairs of wood or stone toa
chaotic jumble ofstairs hanging in radiant space,
ora particular one created for that portal. The
where no two steps share the same gravitational
city of Sigil above the Outlands is known as the
City of Doors because it features an overwhelm- orientation. It includes ramps, hovering platforms,
ing number of such item-keyed portals. and clockwork conveyor belts along its endless

Random. The portal functions for a random period, construction. The adventure anthology Quests from
the infinite Staircase provides more details about this
then shuts down fora similarly random duration.
planar pathway.
Typically, such a portal allows 1d6 + 6 travelers to
pass through, then closes for 1d6 days.
The staircase is home to Nafas, a noble genie cre-
Situation. The portal functions only if a particular ated by the planar winds that blow into the expanse
through its myriad doors. A distant and benevolent
condition is met. A situation-keyed portal might
open on a clear night, when it rains, or when a ‘observer, Nafas hears wishes spoken throughout
certain spell is cast in its vicinity.
the multiverse—wishes he fulfills with the help of
adventurers who happen upon his aeolian palace.
Time. The portal functions only at particular times
on the Material Plane: during a full moon, during
Doors to the Infinite Staircase are often tucked
the spring equinox or winter solstice, or when the away in dusty, half-forgotten places that no one fre-
stars are in certain positions. Once it opens, such quents or pays any attention to. On any given plane,
a portal remains open for a limited time, such as multiple doors might lead to the Infinite Staircase,

for 3 days following the full moon, for 1 hour, or
though entrances aren't common knowledge and
for 10 minutes. are occasionally guarded by devas, sphinxes, yugo-
loths, and other powerful monsters.
Learning and meeting a portal’s requirements can
draw characters into further adventures as they River OCEANUS
chase down a key item, scour old libraries for com- The water of the Oceanus is sweet and fragrant,
mands, or consult sages to find the right time to as befits its headwaters in the Blessed Fields of
visit the portal. Elysium. This plane-spanning waterway provides
a path through some of the Upper Planes. It flows
SPELLS through each of Elysium’s layers, passes through
A number of spells allow direct or indirect access the top layer of the Beastlands, streams across the
to different planes of existence. Gate and Plane Shift top layer of Arborea, and finally drains away some-
can directly transport adventurers to any other where in Arborea’s second layer.
plane, with different degrees of precision. Ethereal- Though it isn't as far-reaching as the Styx, the
ness allows adventurers to enter the Ethereal Plane. Oceanus is still a commonly used path between
And Astral Projection lets adventurers project them- planes and layers. Trading vessels sail up and down
selves into the Astral Plane and from there travel to its length, and small towns line its banks. Travelers
the Outer Planes. can usually find a boat to hire somewhere along
its shores.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 177

River Styx Planar adventures ought to be extraordinary.
The River Styx bubbles with grease, foul flotsam, As adventurers reach the medium to high levels of
and the putrid remains of battles along its banks. your campaign, they find more cause to venture
The ill effects of the Styx are described under beyond the confines of the world they call home and
“Hazards” in chapter 3, explore the planes. If you are ready for the party
The Styx churns through the top layers of Ache- to undertake a truly mythic quest, such as to find
ron, the Nine Hells, Gehenna, Hades, Carceri, the a lost Artifact or an elusive extraplanar entity, the
Abyss, and Pandemonium. Tributaries of the Styx vast multiverse is yours to explore. As their
physical
snake through lower layers of these planes. For and magical abilities are put to the test, the charac-
example, a tendril of the Styx winds through every ters might find their emotions, values, and spirits
layer of the Nine Hells, allowing passage from one challenged as well.
layer of that plane to the next.
Sinister ferries float on the waters of the Styx, THE BLoop WaR
crewed by pilots skilled in negotiating the unpre-
Throughout history, the teeming demon hordes of
dictable currents and eddies ofthe river, For a price,
the Abyss and the regimented legions ofdevils from
these pilots carry passengers from plane to plane. the Nine Hells have battled for supremacy in the
Some pilots are Fiends, while others are the souls of
cosmos. On worlds of the Material Plane, thos
e who
dead creatures from the Material Plane.
know of the conflict refer to it as the Blood War—a

YoGpRASIL, THE WORLD TREE conflict that has raged for millennia, ravaging the
Lower Planes.
The World Tree, Yggdrasil, is a cosmic ash
tree that
The battlefields ofthe Blood War are concen-
spans the Outer Planes and links them to many
trated in the Nine Hells and the Abyss, though fight-
worlds of the Material Plane. Its roots stretch into
ing also takes place on the Material Plane, on the
the Lower Planes, touching Hades, Pandemonium,
planes between those realms on the Great Whe
and possibly other Lower Planes, Most of its mas- el,
and anywhere else demons and devils congregate.
sive trunk rises through the plane of Ysgard, and
Although the intensity of the conflict waxes and
its branches stretch through the Upper Planes and
wanes, and the front lines of the war can shift
across the Astral to the Material Plane.
drastically, a moment never goes by when demons
Some legends describe a great tree, a seedling of
and devils aren't battling each other somewhere in
Yggdrasil, that the god Corellon planted and tended
the multiverse.
on the First World at the dawn of time. When the
Many demons and devils are obsessed with find-
First World was destroyed, seeds from this tree
ing some advantage for their side in the Bloo
scattered into the void and took root to form the d War,
and powerful mortal adventurers are sometimes
worlds of the Material Plane. Thus, many philos-
drawn into tangled schemes to that end. Addition
ophers and naturalists view all trees or even all -
ally, open conflict between Fiends is a constant,
plants as descendants of Yggdrasil, part of a vast
threat on most of the Lower Planes, even when it is
network of plant life across the multiverse.
incidental to the missions that bring characters to
Planar travelers can climb among the roots and
those planes. A simple quest to find a treasure
branches of Yggdrasil to travel from plane to plane lost
in Hades becomes much less simple when the trea-
or world to world. Some creatures position them-
sure is located in the midst of a raging battle!
selves as expert guides to this vast cosmic network
Natives of the Upper Planes also have roles to play
of branching pathways, constantly studying the
in the Blood War. While most of them are content
ever-changing paths as the tree continues its eter-
to watch evil feed on itself, they still take steps to
nal growth,
minimize the threat to the rest of the multiverse.
Whenever the Blood War spills into a location out-
PLANAR ADVENTURING
side the Abyss and the Nine Hells, angels and other
In real-world myths, legends, and literature, ventur- emissaries of the gods—including mortals of excep-
ing onto other planes ofexistence isn't simply
a mat- tional valor—stand ready to intervene,
ter of visiting an unusual environment inhabited
by strange creatures; it's a journey with meaning PLANAR ADVENTURE SITUATIONS
expressed through layers of symbol and metaphor.
You can use the Planar Adventure Situations tabl
Adventuring on the planes of the D&D cosmology e
instead of the tables in the “Adventure Situations
is an opportunity to craft similarly meaningful and
by Level” section in chapter 4 to inspire adventures
profound journeys.
that draw characters into the planes of existence.
These adventure ideas are most appropriate for
characters of level I+,

178 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

A ponrat 10 THe

=e
PLANAR ADVENTURE SITUATIONS
1d10 Situation 1410 Situation
1 When magic fails to revive a dead person, 7 A foolhardy knight carried a holy weapon
the only solution is to venture to the Outer ona doomed mission into the Nine Hells,
Planes to find the person's spirit and either and the powers of Mount Celestia want the
release it from some prison or convince the weapon and the knight's remains retrieved.
person to return
to life. 8 Atitan is imprisoned on an Outer Plane.
People who venture into the woods keep The characters might be trying to stop
accidentally wandering into the Feywild or those who seek to release it, or they might
the Shadowfell. They might never return, want to release it to help defend the world
return with no sense of how much time has from a greater threat.
passed, or return dramatically changed. 9 To prove themselves worthy of an even
A long-dead oracle is the only one who greater quest, the characters are sent to slay
knows how a terrible prophecy might be a horrible monster, win the favor ofa pow-
averted, but the cataclysmic fulfillment of erful planar being, negotiate peace between
the prophecy has already begun, two warring planar factions, or retrieve a
A god has stopped answering prayers and long-lost item on another plane.
won't respond to any Commune spell. 10 {An item of legend is being sold at auction in
A devil has tricked an angel into meddling Sigil, the City of Brass, or some other planar
in the Blood War, and the angel seeks metropolis.
mortal aid.

A ancestor ofone of the characters must be
convinced to bless the character before the
full power ofthe character's bloodline can
be unleashed

R6| COSMOLOGY 179

TOUR OF THE MULTIVERSE layers of the Abyss. Other portals lead to Pande-
monium, Sigil, the gate-town of Plague-Mort in the
Each plane in the multiverse is described below. The
Outlands, and the Astral Plane, making this layer
planes are presented in alphabetical order.
the best way to escape the horrors of the Abyss.
ABYss Iron fortresses dot the landscape, homes to petty
lords and upstart demons that are as changeable as
The Abyss embodies all that is perverse, gruesome,
the Abyss itself.
and chaotic. Its virtually endless layers spiral down-
The portal leading to Plague-Mort is tucked
ward into ever more appalling forms.
within a fortress called the Broken Reach, ruled
Each layer of the Abyss boasts a horrific environ-
by a succubus named Red Shroud. In the Broken
ment that is harsh and inhospitable to mortals. Each
Reach, those who can prove their strength and met-
layer also reflects the entropic nature of the Abyss.
tle can stay unharmed for a few days at least.
Much ofthe plane seems to be in a decaying, crum-
Layers 45-47: Azzagrat. The demon lord Graz'zt
bling, or corroded state, and its corruption affects
embodies manipulation and cruelty, tempting mor-
visitors (see “Curses and Magical Contagions” in
tals with the promise ofappalling delights and dec-
chapter 3).
adent luxuries. He rules over the realm of Azzagrat,
LAYERS OF THE AByss which encompasses three interconnected layers
‘The layers of the Abyss are numbered based on the of the Abyss. His seat of power is the fantastic Ar-
sequence of their discovery and cataloging by ex- gent Palace in the city of Zelatar, whose bustling

plorers from Sigil. Thus, the Plain of Infinite Portals markets and pleasure palaces draw visitors from
is identified as the first layer, Azzagrat encompasses across the multiverse in search of obscure magical

the 45th, 46th, and 47th layers; the Demonweb is lore and perverse delights. By Graz’zt's command,
the 66th layer; and so on. The Layers of the Abyss the demons of Azzagrat present a veneer of civility

table presents several infamous layers; detailed and courtly comity. However, the so-called Triple

descriptions of these layers follow the table. Realm holds as much danger as any other part of
the Abyss, and planar visitors can vanish without
LAYERS OF THE AByss a trace in its mazelike cities and in forests whose

Layer Description trees have serpents for branches.
Layer 66: The Demonweb. Lolth is the Demon
The Plain of On layer 1, corroded iron fortresses Queen of Spiders, whose schemes entangle entire
Infinite Portals defend routes to lower layers. civilizations on worlds across the multiverse. Of all
Azzagrat Graz'zt's corrupt, decadent city is demon lords, she might have the most active inter-
split across layers 45, 46, and 47. est in the worlds of the Material Plane and in the
cultists who do her bidding on those worlds, but her
The ‘On layer 66, Lolth’s web snares all
interest lies only in domination.
Demonweb and hides portals to other planes.
Lolth’s layer is an immense network of thick, mag-
Gaping Maw Layer 88 is a malevolent wilderness ical webbing that forms passageways and cocoon-
surrounding Demogorgon’s ocean like chambers. Structures, ships, and other objects
fortress are caught in the webbing. The webs conceal ran-
Thanatos On layer 113, an endless graveyard dom portals that snare objects from demiplanes and
hosts Orcus and the sleepless Material Plane worlds that figure into the schemes
of the Spider Queen. Lolth’s servants also build
dead,
dungeons amid the webbing, trapping and hunting
The Slime Pits Layer 222, a fetid realm of ooze
Lolth’s hated enemies within crisscrossing corridors
(Shedaklah) and fungi, obeys the whims of of web-mortared stone. Far beneath these dungeons
Juiblex and Zuggtmoy. lie the bottomless Demonweb Pits where the Spider
The Yeenoghu and his gnoll servants Queen dwells with her most loyal servants—yochlol
Death Dells prow! layer 422—a cruel, desolate demons created to serve her that outrank mightier
realm. demons while in the Spider Queen's realm.
Layer 88: The Gaping Maw. The Sibilant Beast
The Endless Layer 600’s endless labyrinth turns
and the self-styled Prince of Demons, Demogorgon
Maze visitors into Baphomet's prey.
yearns for nothing less than undoing the order of
Layer I: The Plain of Infinite Portals. This layer is the multiverse. A two-headed monster who seems
the miserable gateway to the infinite layers of the as much in conflict with himself as with other be-
Abyss. Under a glaring red sun, the rocky ground gs, the Prince of Demons inspires fear and hatred
contains gaping craters that are portals to the other among other demons and demon lords.

180 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

fi

Twe oerairus oF THe PLANES 15

TANGLED IN THE Demonwer Pirs

Demogorgon's layer is a vast wilderness of bru- mausoleums, gravestones, and sarcophagi litter the
tality and horror known as the Gaping Maw, where landscape. Undead swarm across the plane, bursting
even powerful demons are overcome by fear. from their tombs and graves to tear apart any crea-
Reflecting Demogorgon’s dual nature, the Gaping tures foolish enough to journey here.
Maw consists of a massive primeval continent co rcus rules Thanatos from a vast palace known
ered in dense jungle, surrounded by a seemingly as Everlost, crafted of obsidian and bone. Set in a
endless expanse of ocean and brine flats. The Prince howling wasteland called Oblivion’s End, the palace
of Demons rules his layer from two serpentine tow- is surrounded by tombs and graves dug into the
ers, which emerge from a turbid sea. Each tower is sheer slopes of narrow valleys, creating a tiered
topped with an enormous fanged skull. The spires necropolis.

constitute the fortress of Abysm, where echoes of Layer
222: The Slime Pits. Also known as
Demogorgon’s turbulent thoughts resound through Shedaklah, this layer is ruled by two separate yet
the halls, tearing at the minds of creatures who equally repugnant demon lords—Juiblex and Zuggt-
dare to enter. moy—who coexist with little conflict.
Layer 115: Thanatos. Known as the Demon Prince Juiblex, the Demon Lord ofSlimes and Oozes, is
of Undeath and the Blood Lord, the demon lord Or- an amorphous mass that lurks in the abyssal depths.
cus is worshiped by Undead and by living creatures The wretched Faceless Lord cares nothing for
that channel the power of undeath. A brooding and cultists or mortal servants, and its sole desire is to
nihilistic entity, Orcus yearns to make the multi- turn all creatures into formless copies of its horrid
verse a place of death and despair, forever unchang- self. Zuggtmoy is the Demon Queen of Fungi and
ing except by his will, and to turn all creatures into the Lady of Rot and Decay. Her primary desire is
Undead under his control. to infect the living with spores, transforming them
Orcus's realm of Thanatos is a land of bleak into her servants and, eventually, into decomposing
mountains, barren moors, ruined cities, and forests hosts for the mushrooms, molds, and other fungi
of twisted black trees under a black sky. Tombs, that she spawns

CHAPTER 6 |

As the name suggests, the Slime Pits is a bubbling
ACHERON
morass of fetid sludge. The landscape is covered in
vast expanses of caustic slimes, and strange organic Acheron is made of immense iron blocks whose

forms rise from the oceans of ooze at Juiblex’s com- metallic surfaces ring beneath the marching feet of

mand. Zuggtmoy's palace consists of two dozen endless armies. These blocks drift through an airy
immense mushrooms, among the largest in e3 id, sometimes colliding with a fearsome clang,
crushing all between them and sending shudders
tence, hollowed into grand chambers and twisting
corridors. The palace is surrounded by a field of through the plane.

acidic puffballs and poisonous vapors. Acheron has four layers, with the largest blocks
gravitating to the top layer. Some scholars have the-
Layer 422: The Death Dells. The demon lord Yeeno-
ghu hungers for slaughter and senseless destruction. orized that the crashing blocks of the upper layers

Gnolls are his instruments on the Material Plane, are eventually broken down into smaller chunks

and he drives them to ever-greater atrocities in his of matter that sink to the lower layers. The truth is
name, Delighting in sorrow and hopelessness, the actually the opposite: the tiny shards of Ocanthus,

Gnoll Lord yearns to turn the cosmos into a waste- the lowest layer, break off from an icy mire in its.

land in which the last surviving gnolls tear one an- deepest recesses and are gradually assembled and

other apart for the right to feast upon the dead. organized, perhaps under the influence of nearby
Yeenoghu rules a layer of ravines and badlands Mechanus, into the perfect cubes of Avalas,

known as the Death Dells. Here, creatures must The nature of Acheron instills bloodlust in those
hunt to survive. Even plants try to snare the un- who visit the plane (see “Environmental Effects” in

wary to bathe their roots in blood. Yeenoghu’s chapter 3).
servants, helping to sate their master's hunger as
Layers OF ACHERON
he prowls his kingdom, capture creatures from the
Material Plane for release in the Gnoll Lord's realm. Layer Description
Layer 600: The Endless Maze. The demon lord Avalas Spirit soldiers wage endless wars.
Baphomet, also known as the Horned King and the across debris-strewn battlefields.
Prince of Beasts, embodies bestial bloodlust. If he
Thuldanin Pitted, hollow cubes are filled with the
had his way, civilization would crumble and all mor-
tals would embrace their predatory instincts.
cast-off machinery of war.
Baphomet's layer is a never-ending dungeon with Tintibulus Jagged blocks tumble in darkness,
the Horned King’s enormous palace at its center. A holding frozen memories sapped by
confusing jumble of crooked hallways and myriad the River Styx and crystallized into
chambers, the palace is surrounded by a mile-wide fleeting images.
moat concealing a confounding series of submerged
Ocanthus — Maelstroms of razor-sharp debris swirl
stairs and tunnels leading deeper into the fortress,
above a mire of black ice.

ABYSS ADVENTURES
ACHERON ADVENTURES
The Abyss embodies the loathsome corruption of
Acheron is a plane of enforced order, where rigid
chaos and evil. A descent into the Abyss is a journey
conformity leads to crushed spirits and broken
into a hostile and uncharted environment. It’s also
hopes. The spirits here can't conceive of anyone
an opportunity to confront the evil in one’s own,
refusing to obey the will of their commanders. They
heart and to resist the temptation to turn against
are dedicated soldiers, forever lacking a cause.
allies in order to survive. Heroic characters might
make a desperate last stand against endless hordes A journey into Acheron is a confrontation with
the bleak nihilism of unending conflict, the harsh
of demons here, or they might try to avoid detection
reality of authoritarian rule, and the uncaring pres-
while seeking a holy relic left behind by some lost
hero who dared to venture here. sures of social conformity. It’s also an opportunity

It’s the nature of the Abyss to contaminate the
for characters to grapple with the question of what
they are fighting for, among armies that have for-
other planes it touches. Opening a portal to the
Abyss from any other plane allows the Abyss to cre- gotten how to even ask the question,
On a more literal level, an adventure in Acheron
ate tiny pockets of Abyssal evil that can eventually
can involve preventing a villain from scavenging
become so corrupted that they're drawn into the
Abyss. Thus, adventurers exploring a desecrated ‘Thuldanin for some new horror of warfare to be

temple or fetid swamp on the Material Plane can
unleashed on the battlefield. Or it might require
retrieving a secret from the imprisoned thoughts or
unexpectedly find themselves in a demon-infested
environment very much like the Abyss without ever memories found in the blocks of

leaving their home plane,

182 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

ARBOREA ARCADIA
Arborea is a plane of extremes: stupendously craggy Arcadia thrives with orchards of perfectly lined
mountains; unbelievably deep gorges; forests of trees, ruler-straight streams, orderly fields, im-
monstrously huge trees; and vast stretches of wheat maculate roads, and cities laid out in geometrically
fields, orchards, and arbors. Wild-hearted nature pleasing shapes. The mountains bear no trace of
spirits dwell in every glade and stream, brooking no erosion.

infringement. Travelers must tread lightly. Night and day are determined by an orb that
‘The air of Arborea seems charged with excite- floats in the sky above both of Arcadia's layers. Half
ment. Sudden squalls brew up out of nowhere, of the orb radiates sunlight and brings about the
beating the tree-lined paths with heavy winds. The day; the other half sheds moonlight and brings on
storms pass within minutes and leave behind warm the starry night. The orb rotates evenly without
ares of sunlight filtering through the forest canopy. fail, spreading day and night across the entire plane.
Music always seems to be playing in the distance; The weather in Arcadia is governed by four allied
sometimes it originates from groups of elf musi- demigods called the Storm Kings: the Cloud King,
cians, but just as often the faint tune is merely the the Wind Queen, the Lightning King, and the Rain
wind curling through the boles of the great trees. Queen, Each one lives in a castle surrounded by the
type of weather that ruler controls.
LAYERS OF ARBOREA Arcadia is suffused with a vigorous life en-
Layer Description ergy that bestows great vitality on visitors (see
“Environmental Effects” in chapter 3).
‘Arvandor Towering trees, colorful wildflowers,
abundant grain, and delicious fruit
LaveRs OF ARCADIA
create a lush environment.
Layer Description
Aquallor An eternal ocean fed by the River
Abellio Everything in these fields of plenty is
Oceanus is home to teeming sea life
dedicated to the good of all.
and mighty storms.
Buxenus Military forces gather their strength,
Mithardir A desert of white sand is abandoned
amid pleasant valleys and orchards, to
by whatever powers once lived there.
reclaim the lost layer of Menausus—

ARBOREA ADVENTURES now part of Mechanus.
Arborea is a larger-than-life place ofviolent moods
ARCADIA ADVENTURES
and deep affections, of whim backed by steel, and of
passions that blaze brightly until they burn out. Its
Everything on Arcadia works toward the common,
good-natured inhabitants are dedicated to fighting good and a flawless existence. Here, purity is eter-
nal, and nothing intrudes on harmony. Individuality
evil, but their reckless emotions sometimes break
free with devastating consequences. Rage is as com-
is subsumed to peaceful life in community, and
military might can be brought to bear on those who
mon and as honored as joy in Arborea.
disrupt that peace.
‘An adventure in Arborea can be an opportunity
An adventure in Arcadia can be
for characters to discover who they are when masks
an opportunity to explore
fall away and the honesty of unfettered emotion is
revealed. The inhabitants of the plane are accus- the tension between
individual freedom
tomed to this emotional honesty. Lifelong friends
and societal re-
might share a laugh over food and wine, cross
blades over a mutual lover, and write songs cele~
sponsibility for
the common
brating each other's courage and integrity, all in a
good. Even law-
single evening. For those who aren't accustomed to
fully inclined
this candor, though, it can lead to hurt feelings and
adventurers
lingering resentment.
rarely conform
Creatures that visit Arborea and then leave some-
neatly to social
times experience a desperate desire to return—a
expectations,
yearning so intense that it can interfere with day-
and a visit to
to-day life.
this plane can
‘What secrets lie buried in the sands of Mithardir?
highlight that
An expedition might involve investigating whatever
conflict.
gods or Celestials once inhabited the silver desert or
find some knowledge they possessed.

ASTRAL PLANE Coror Poors
The Astral Plane is a realm of thought and dream, Gateways leading from the Astral Plane to other
where visitors travel as disembodied souls to reach planes appear as two-dimensional pools of rip-
the Outer Planes. It is a great silvery sea, the same pling colors, 1d6 « 10 feet in diameter. (*Color,” as
above and below, with swirling wisps of white and with everything in the Astral Plane, is a matter of
gray streaking among motes of light—the metaphor; since these portals are perceived by the
distant
stars of far-flung Wildspace systems. Most of the Astral self and not by physical eyes, their colors are

Astral Sea is a vast, empty expanse. Visitors occa- understood rather than seen.) Traveling to another
sionally stumble upon the petrified corpse ofa dead plane requires locating a color pool that leads to the
god or other chunks of rock drifting forever in the desired plane. These gateways can be identified by
silvery void. Much more commonplace are color color, as shown on the Astral Color Pools table.
pools—magical pools of colored light that flicker like
radiant, spinning coins. AsTRAL CoLor Poots
Creatures on the Astral Plane don't age or suffer 1420 Plane Pool Color
from hunger or thirst. For this reason, creatures 1 Abyss Amethyst
that live on the Astral Plane (such as githyanki) es-
2 Acheron Flame red
tablish outposts on other planes, often the Material
Plane, so their children can grow to maturity. 3 Arborea Sapphire blue
4 Arcadia Saffron
NAVIGATING THE ASTRAL PLANE
5 Beastlands Emerald green
A traveler in the Astral Plane can move by sim-
ply thinking about moving, but distance has little 6 — Bytopia Amber
meaning. In combat, though, a creature has a Fly 7 Carceri Olive
Speed (in feet) equal to 5 times its Intelligence score
3 Elysium Orange
and can hover.
Just as movement is accomplished by the power 9 Ethereal Plane Spiraling white
of thought, all that is required to find one's destina- 10 Gehenna Russet .
tion is to think about it. As long as the destination 1 Hades Rust
is somewhere in the Astral Plane (or in Wildspace,
12 Limbo Jet black
as described below)—such as “the nearest githyanki
outpost,” “the nearest color pool leading to the 13-14 Material Plane Silver
Abyss," or “the Wildspace system of Realmspace”— 15 Mechanus Diamond blue
thinking about a place makes the creature aware of
16 Mount Celestia Gold
the most direct route to that location, The creature
17 Nine Hells Ruby
doesn't know how long the journey will take or how
Perilous it will be, just which direction to go in. 18 Outlands Leather brown
The DM decides how long it takes to get to a 19 Pandemonium Magenta
desired destination. A trek to a specific location—a
20 Ysgard Indigo
particular Wildspace system or Astral outpost, for
example—might take 4d6 days, For a more general
‘WILDSPACE
location, such as a color pool leading to a specified
Bobbing in the Astral Plane like corks in an ocean
plane, the journey might take 1d4 x 10 hours.
are vast, airless expanses called Wildspace systems.
In these systems, the Astral Plane overlaps with
Deap Gops
the Material Plane, and the stars and planets of the
The Astral Plane is where the petrified remains of
Material Plane are accessible from the Astral Plane.
dead gods end up—gods who were slain by more
Every world of the Material Plane is situated in a
powerful entities or who lost all their mortal wor-
Wildspace system.
shipers and perished as a result. A dead god looks
As an Astral traveler approaches a Wildspace
like a gigantic, nondescript stone statue that bears
system, the silver fog of the Astral Plane gradually
little resemblance to the divine entity it once was.
thins until it falls away in Wildspace. Then the sun
Githyanki, mind flayers, and other residents of the
Astral Plane sometimes turn these drifting hulks
of the Wildspace system comes into view—often
millions of miles away—along with colorful gas
into outposts and cities, many of which are hol-
clouds, planets, moons, and other cosmic bodies.
lowed out beneath the surface. The githyanki city of
A Wildspace system teems with space-dwelling
Tulnarath is perhaps the most infamous such place.
life-forms, including spores, plankton, and larger
creatures that resemble fish and aquatic mammals.
Creatures and objects in Wildspace age normally

184. CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

A SPELLJAMMING WAED SHIP APPROACHES

we Psycuic WIND LOCATION EFFECTS
1420 Location Effect
1-8 _Diverted; add 146 days to travel time
and exist on both the Astral Plane and Material 9-12 Blown astray; add 3410 days to travel time
Plane simultaneously. This overlap enables crea-
13-16 Lost; at the end of the travel time, the char-
tures to use spells such as Teleport to travel from
acters arrive at a location other than the
Wildspace to a nearby world, or vice versa, A crea~
ture or ship traveling from one Wildspace system intended destination

to another must cross the Astral Plane unless it has. 17-20 Sent through a random color pool (roll on
some other magical means of traveling from one the Astral Color Pools table)
world to another. (See “Material Plane” in this chap-
ter.) Spelliammer: Adventures in Space contains exten- Each traveler caught in a psychic wind makes a DC
sive information about Wildspace and Astral travel. 15 Intelligence saving throw. Ona failed save, the
traveler suffers a random effect from the Psychic
Psycuic WinD Wind Psychic Effects table as well.
A psychic wind is a storm of thought that batters
travelers’ minds rather than their bodies. The storm PsycHic WIND PsycHic EFFECTS
is made of lost memories, forgotten ideas, and sub- 1420 Psychic Effect
conscious fears that went astray in the Astral Plane
1-8 You have the Stunned condition for 1 min-
and conglomerated into this powerful force.
ute; you repeat the saving throw at the end
A psychic wind is first sensed as a rapid darkening
of the silver-gray sky. After Id4 minutes, the area of each of your turns, ending the effect on

becomes as dark as a moonless night. As the sky yourself
on a success.
darkens, the traveler feels buffeting and shaking, 9-12 You take 11 (2d10) Psychic damage.
as if the plane were rebelling against the storm. As
13-17 You take 22 (4d10) Psychic damage.
quickly as it comes, the psychic wind passes, and the
18-20 You have the Unconscious condition for 5
sky returns to normal in I minute.
A group of travelers journeying together is sub- (1410) hours; the effect on you ends if you

jected to one location effect, determined by consult- take damage or if another creature takes an

ing the Psychic Wind Locations Effects table. action to shake you awake.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 185

ASTRAL PLANE ADVENTURES BEASTLANDS ADVENTURES
Characters most often visit the Astral Plane as a ‘The Beastlands embodies wild, beautiful nature
way of getting somewhere else—either to one of the and the vibrant power of life thriving in the natural
Outer Planes or to different worlds of the Material world. Visitors to the plane feel invigorated and
Plane via Wildspace. En route, they might encoun- more vital—their minds more alert, their reflexes
ter fellow travelers, such as Celestials, Fiends, slaadi, sharpened, and their strides quickened. Hunger
modrons, or githyanki. pangs are acute, but food and drink taste better
Asa realm of thought, memory, and dream, the than ever before. Sleep is always deep and restful,
Astral Plane can also be an adventure destination. and sleepers always awaken alert.
Characters might try to plumb the crystallized Adventures in the Beastlands might explore the
thoughts of dead gods or sift information from ways that good philosophies, while purporting to
the torrent of a psychic wind. Or they could face value life, actually devalue the physical nature of
Astral manifestations of their own memories, fears, life in favor of abstract concepts of law and ethics.
and dreams. Characters might end up in conflict with those who
dismiss animals as inferior and irrelevant forms
BEASTLANDS of life.
‘The Beastlands is a plane of nature unbound,
of forests ranging from moss-hung mangroves BYTOPIA
to snow-laden pines, of thick jungles where the The surfaces of Bytopia's two layers face each other
branches are woven so tight that no light pene- like the covers of
a closed book. Looking up from
trates, ofvast plains where grains and wildflow- Dothion, the “top” layer of the plane, a traveler can
ers wave in the wind with vibrant life. The plane see Shurrock, its other layer, about a mile overhead.
embodies nature's wildness and beauty, but it also Both layers are idealized worlds that reflect the
speaks to the animal within all living creatures—not plane's philosophy of personal achievement along-
necessarily in a fierce, predatory way but with re- side social interdependence.
spect to their physical substance and fundamental
needs. The spirits of the dead on the Beastlands typ- Layers OF BYTOPIA
ically take animal forms or part-animal forms (such Layer Description
as centaurs). Among the greatest inhabitants of this
Dothion Farms nestled among well-tamed
plane are the primal spirits called animal lords.
Whenever a visitor slays a Beast native to the
woods are hubs ofpastoral activity and

plane, the slayer must succeed on a DC 10 Charisma individual industry.
saving throw or shape-shift into the type of Beast Shurrock Small communities thrive around quar-
that was slain. The creature's game statistics are ries and mills amid rough country and
replaced by the Beast's stat block, but the creature harsh weather.
retains its alignment, personality, creature type,
Intelligence score, and ability to speak. At the end of ByTOPIA ADVENTURES
each Long Rest, the shape-shifted creature repeats Bytopia is the heaven of productive work, the sat-
the save. On a successful save, the creature returns isfaction of a job well done. The goodness flowing
to its true form. After three failed saves, the trans- through the plane creates feelings of goodwill
formation can be undone only by a Remove Curse and happiness in creatures dwelling there. While
spell or similar magic. Dothion rewards those who seek a quiet life,
Shurrock is the paradise of those who continually
LAYERS OF THE BEASTLANDS challenge and better themselves.
Layer Description ‘The two layers of Bytopia are often referred to as
the “Twin Paradises,” and it’s said that every action
Krigala The River Oceanus is a strong torrent
carried out on one layer has repercussions on the
flowing through this wilderness of
other—an equal and opposite reaction, though a
eternal summer noon,
more metaphorical than physical one. An adventure
Brux A red sun hovers forever on the hori- in Bytopia might challenge characters to recognize
zon as mists and streams roil through the impact their actions have on the world by wit-
the trees in eternal twilight. nessing the mirrored reactions to their deeds on the

Karasuthra A pale moon provides the only light in opposite layer.

this wilderness ofeternal night.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

CARCERI
The grim inspiration for all other prisons in exis-
tence, Carceri is a plane of desolation and despair.
Its six layers hold vast bogs, fetid jungles, wind-
swept deserts, jagged mountains, frigid oceans, and
black ice. All form a miserable home for the traitors
and backstabbers trapped on this prison plane

Layers OF CarceRi
Layer Deseri

Orthrys The River Styx meanders through a
layer of vast bogs and quicksand.
Cathrys The stench of decay hangs over fetid
jungles and scarlet plains.

Minethys Stinging sand blows in unending
storms, hiding the ruins ofthe ancient
city Payratheon.

Colothys Deep chasms cut between cruel
mountains make foot travel nearly
impossible.

Porphatys Cold, acidic oceans are fed by constant
black snow.

Agathys Black ice streaked with red covers this
frigid realm

PRISON PLANE
DEMIPLANES
No one can leave Carceri easily. Magical efforts to
leave the plane by any spell other than Wish simply Demiplanes are extradimensional spaces that come
fail. Portals and gates that open onto the plane be: into being by a variety of means and boast their
come one-way only. Secret passages out of the plane own physical laws. Some are created by spells.

exist, but they are hidden and well guarded by traps Others are natural folds of reality pinched off from

and deadly monsters. And though the River Styx the rest of the multiverse. Theoretically, a Plane
flows between Carceri and its neighbors, the pas- Shift spell can carry travelers to a demiplane, but
sage is extremely dangerous, and ferries leading out the proper frequency required for the tuning fork
of Carceri are both rare and expensive. can be extremely hard to acquire. The Gate spell
is more reliable, assuming the caster knows of
CaRrcERI ADVENTURES the demiplane.
Carceriis a sunless plane of despair, ofpassions and A demiplane can be as small as a single chamber
poisons, and of realm-shattering betrayals, Hatreds or large enough to contain an entire realm. For
ce a deep, slow-moving river, and there’s no example, a Mordenkainen’s Magnificent Mansion spell
telling what the flood oftreachery will consume creates a demiplane consisting of a foyer with multi
next. [tis said that prisoners can escape Carceri ple adjoining rooms, while the land of Barovia exists
only by becoming stronger than whatever force entirely within a demiplane under the sway of its
imprisoned them there, but that’s a difficult task on vampire lord, Strahd von Zarovich, When a demi-
a plane whose very nature breeds despair and be- plane is connected to the Material Plane or some
trayal. The same tendency toward betrayal prevents other plane, entering the demiplane can be as simple
those who are imprisoned here from working to- as moving through a portal or passing through a
gether for long toward the common goal of escape. wall of mist.
Adventures on Carceri might explore the forces—
spiritual and psychological as well as physical and DEMIPLANE ADVENTURES
outright demonic—that keep characters trapped Demiplanes are limited realities shaped according

or imprisoned there. Characters might help a pris- to the will of whoever created them. Adventures in
oner escape, from an unjustly held spirit to some demiplanes might let characters explore how they
primeval god banished to oblivion here. would shape reality to suit their desires and ideals,
or confront distortions of reality crafted by villains.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 187

Aanaxocna scours RETURN HOME
AcITY ON THE PLANE OF AiR, |

Labyrinth Winds. Much ofthe Plane of Airis a

home to constant winds ofvary-
complex web of air streams, currents, and winds
called the Labyrinth Winds. These range from
ing strength. Here and there, chunks of earth drift
stiff breezes to howling gales that can rip a crea-
in the openness, many covered with lush vegetation.
ture apart. Even the most skilled flying creatures
These earth motes serve as homes for djinn and
must navigate these currents carefully, flying
other natives of the plane. Other creatures live on
with the winds, not against them.
cloud banks infused with magic to become solid
Mistral Reach. Located near the Para-elemental
surfaces, supporting towns and castles.
Drifting clouds can obscure visibility in any di- Plane of Ice, the Mistral Reach is a region of frigid
rection in the plane. Storms are frequent, ranging winds and driving snowstorms. Earth motes in
the reach are covered with snow and ice.
from strong thunderstorms to fierce tornadoes or
Sirocco Straits. The Sirocco Straits is the region of
mighty hurricanes. The air is mild, except near the
the plane nearest to the Para-elemental Plane of
Para-elemental Planes at either end of the plane,
where the temperature is more extreme. Rain and Ash, where hot, dry winds scour earth motes into
barren chunks of rock.
snow fall only in the part of the plane nearest to the
Para-elemental Plane of Ice. PLANE OF AiR ADVENTURES
Although few landmarks distinguish one area of
The essential nature of air is movement, animation,
the Plane of Air from any other, the following are
and inspiration. Air is the breath of life, the winds
notable features of the plane:
of change, the fresh breeze that clears away the fog
‘Aaga. Here and there are hidden realms reachable of ignorance and the stuffiness of old ideas.
only by following a particular sequence of flowing When turned toward wicked ideals by cultists of
winds. Fabled Aaga is one such realm, a shining Elemental Evil, elemental air represents destructive
domain of silver spires and verdant gardens atop power turned to vengeful ends. Cultists of Evil Air
a fertile earth mote. The Wind Dukes of Aaga wield howling storms to forcefully express their
are dedicated to law and good, and they main- personal freedom or lay claim to things they feel
tain a vigilant watch against the depredations of they have been wrongfully denied.
Elemental Evil. They are served by aarakocra.

188 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

ELEMENTAL PLANE OF EARTH ‘The weather on the plane is marked by fierce
winds and thick ash. Although the air is breathable,
The Plane of Earth is a chain of mountains rising
creatures not native to the plane must cover their
higher than any mountain range on the Material
mouths and eyes to avoid stinging cinders. The
Plane. It has no sun of its own, and no air surrounds
efreet use magic to keep the cinder storms away
the peaks of its highest mountains. Most visitors to
from the City of Brass, but elsewhere in the plane,
the plane arrive by way of vast caverns that honey-
the wind always blows, sometimes rising to hui
comb the mountains.
cane force during the worst storms.
Important features of the Plane of Earth include
‘The heat on the Plane of Fire is comparable to a
the following:
hot desert on the Material Plane and poses a similar
City of Jewels. The plane's largest cavern, called the threat to travelers (see “Environmental Effects” in
Great Dismal Delve or the Sevenfold Mazework, chapter 3). Sources of water are rare, so travelers
is home to the City of Jewels—the capital city of must carry their own supplies or produce water by
the dao. The dao take great pride in their wealth magic.
and send teams across the plane in search of new Important features of the Plane of Fire include the
veins of ore and gemstones. Thanks to these ex- following:
peditions, every building and significant object in
Cinder Wastes. The Plane of Fire is dominated by a
the city is made from precious stones and metals,
great expanse of black cinders and embers crossed
including the slender gemstone-inlaid spires that
by rivers of lava. Roving bands of salamanders
top most buildings. The city is protected by a
battle each other, raid azer outposts, and avoid
powerful spell that alerts the entire population if'a
patrols from the City of Brass. Obsidian ruins dot
visitor steals even a single stone.
the desert—remnants of forgotten civilizations.
Furnaces. The Furnaces are the mountains nearest
City of Brass. Perhaps the best-known location on
the Para-elemental Plane of Magma. Lava seeps
the Inner Planes is the City of Brass, which stands
through their caverns, and the air reeks of sulfur.
on the shores of the Sea of Fire. This is the fabled
‘The dao have great forges and smelting furnaces
city of the efreet, and its ornate spires and spiked
here to process ores and shape precious metals.
wallls reflect the efreet’s grandiose and cruel
Mud Hills. The Mud Hills abut the swampy
nature. True to the nature of the Plane of Fire,
Para-elemental Plane of Ooze. Landslides wear
everything in the city seems alive with dancing
away the slopes of the hills, sending cascades of
flames, reflecting the vibrant energy of the place.
earth and stone into the bottomless swamp. The
‘The heart ofthe city is the formidable Charcoal
Plane of Earth constantly regenerates the land,
Palace, where the tyrannical emperor of the
pushing new hills up as the old ones erode to
efreet reigns supreme, surrounded by nobles and a
nothing.
host of servants, guardians, and sycophants.
PLANE OF EARTH ADVENTURES Sea of Fire. Lava flows through the Fountains of
Earth symbolizes stability, rigidity, stern resolve, Creation toward the Para-elemental Plane of Ash
and tradition. The plane’s position opposite the and pools into a great expanse of lava called the
Plane ofAir in the ring ofthe Elemental Planes Sea of Fire, traversed by efreeti and azer sailors in
reflects its opposition to almost everything air great brass ships. Islands of obsidian and basalt jut
represents. up from the sea, dotted with ancient ruins and the
Elemental Evil views earth instead as an implaca- lairs of powerful red dragons,
ble force ofdestruction, perfectly willing to crush Torchy’s. Built atop a tall basalt crag in the middle
venerable institutions and respected traditions in ofa lava river is an iron-walled tavern that is most

its advance. Cultists of Evil Earth crave the power easily reached by hot-air balloon. The proprietor
to destroy the works of civilization with landslides, is a sentient Flame Tongue (Mace) named Torchy,
sinkholes, or mighty earthquakes, and they believe who sells a fine ale and seems to have a new
the earth thirsts for the blood of those who don't wielder every few months. Torchy's is a popular
venerate it properly. hangout for ballooning enthusiasts.

ELEMENTAL PLANE OF FIRE ELEMENTAL F1RE ADVENTURES
Fire represents vibrancy, passion, and change. At
A blazing sun hangs at the zenith of a golden sky
its best, fire reflects the light of inspiration, the
above the Plane of Fire, waxing and waning on a
warmth of compassion, and the flame of desire.
24-hour cycle. It ranges from white hot at noon to
The cults of Elemental Evil represent fire at
deep red at midnight, so the darkest hours of the
its worst: cruel and wantonly destructive. Cult-
plane display a deep-red twilight. At noon, the light
ists of Evil Fire seek the power to burn away the
is intense. Most business in the City of Brass (see
impurities of the world with volcanic eruptions,
below) takes place during the darker hours.

CHAPTERS | COSMOLOGY 189

The City oF Brass 15 0 wun F

uncontrolled wildfires, heat waves, and droughts, clouds over and releases a deluge of rain, often
transforming the Material Plane into a mirror
of accompanied by spectacular shows oflightning, be-
the Cinder Wastes. fore clearing up again. At night,
a glittering array o!
Adventurers frequently come to the City of Brass tars and auroras bedecks the sky.
on quests for legendary magic. If it’s possible to buy ‘The weather on the plane is a lesson in extremes.
magic items in your campaign, the City of Brass is If the sea isn't calm, it is battered by storms. On rare
the most likely place to find any item for sale. The ‘occasions, a tremo
in the
r planar firmament sends
efreet are fond of trading in favors, especially when a rogue wave sweeping across the plane, swamping
they have the upper hand in negotiations. Perhaps a entire island
and riving
s ships down to the reefs.
magical contagion or poison can be cured only with Any land that rises above the surface of the sea
ing that must be purchased in the markets of is hotly contested by the few
air breathers that
live on the plane. Fleets of rafts and ships lashed
together serve as solid ground where nothing else
ELEMENTAL PLANE OF WATER is available, although most natives of the plane
The Plane of Water is an endless sea, called the Sea never
break the surface of the sea and thus ignore
of Worlds, dotted with atoll nds that rise these habitations.
up from enormous coral reefs that seem to stretch 1g are among
the most important fea-
forever into the depths. The storms that move tures of the Plane of Water:
across the sea sometimes create temporary portals
Citadel of Ten Thousand Pearls. The nominal
to the Material Plane and draw ships into the Plane
emperor of the marids dwells in the Citadel of Ten
of Water. Surviving vessels from countless worlds
Thousand Pearls, an opulent palace made of coral
and navies ply these waters with little hope of ever
and studded with pearls. The palace is the glit-
returning home.
tering centerpiece of the Sea ofLight (see below).
A warm sun arcs across the sky of the Plane of
‘isitors are welcome to ask favors of the emperor,
seemito
ngrise and set from withi
the
n
whose mood is as changeable as the sea.
water at the horizon, Several times a day, the sky

CHAPTER
6 | COSMOLOGY

Darkened Depths. The deeper extents of the plane,
ELys1uM
where no sunlight reaches, are called the Dark-
ened Depths. Horrid creatures dwell here, and the Elysium is home to creatures of unfettered kind-
absolute cold and crushing pressure mean a swift ness and a refuge for planar travelers seeking a safe

end to creatures accustomed to the surface or the haven. The plane's bucolic landscapes glimmer with
Sea of Light. Krakens and other mighty leviathans life and beauty.
claim this realm. The River Oceanus originates in the lowest layer
Isle of Dread. One ofthe few islands on the plane of Elysium, Thalasia, and flows through the plane's
is the Isle of Dread, which is connected to the layers before cascading onward to the Beastlands.
Material Plane by means of a storm that regu- Though illustrations ofthe plane's layers seem to
larly sweeps over the island. Ships from different show the river flowing “up” from each layer to the
worlds of the Material Plane end up wrecked on ‘one “above” it, the experience of passing from one
the rocks and reefs around the island, and settle- layer to another on the river is no more dramatic
ments across the island are populated by the de- than weathering rapids on any ordinary river.
scendants of sailors who never found a way home. Along its course, the great river splits into myriad
Theoretically, travelers who understand the work- smaller flows, recombines, and splits again.
ings of the storm could use it to travel to a desired
Material Plane world. Layers oF ELysium
Sea of Ice. Bordering the Para-elemental Plane of Layer Description
Ice is the Sea of Ice. The frigid water is choked Amoria ‘Small towns on the banks ofthe River
with icebergs and sheet ice, which are inhabited
Oceanus, surrounded by lush mead-
by cold-loving creatures from the Plane of Ice.
‘ows, are among the most hospitable
Drifting icebergs can carry these creatures far-
refuges on the Outer Planes.
ther into the Plane of Water to threaten ships and
islands in warmer seas. Eronia Steep hills, craggy mountains, and
Sea of Light. Life flourishes in the sunlit waters of white granite valleys offer a rugged
the Sea of Light, located in the upper reaches of home for hardy souls.
the Sea of Worlds. Aquatic peoples craft castles Belierin Lighthouses pierce the fog and form
and fortresses in the coral reefs here.
hubs for small communities amid
Silt Flats. The region of the Plane of Water nearest
sprawling marshlands.
to the Para-elemental Plane of Ooze is called the
Thalasia The Heroic Isles, rising from the head-
Silt Flats. The water is thick with soil and sludge,
turning into muddy ground before giving way to waters ofthe River Oceanus, hold the
the great swamp that is the Para-elemental Plane. best departed souls.

ELEMENTAL WATER ADVENTURES ELYSIUM ADVENTURES
The nature of water is to flow, not like the gust- ‘Tranquility
and contentment seep into the bones
ing wind or the leaping flame, but smoothly and and souls of those who enter Elysium. The longer
steadily. Itis the rhythm of the tide, the nectar of a visitor remains on the plane, the less reason they
life, the bitter tears of mourning, and the balm of find to ever leave. An adventure in Elysium can
sympathy and healing. Given time, it can erode all challenge characters’ devotion to doing good by
in its path. offering them the opportunity (or the temptation)
Elemental Evil emphasizes the erosive power of to rest from their labors and enjoy a well-earned
water, as well as the destruction wrought by surg- reward.
ing tides, deadly maelstroms, and raging torrents. Belierin is said to be the prison of some deadly
Cultists of Evil Water believe the seas and deep creature. Some tales say it's a powerful titan, per-
waters are eager to reclaim the water trapped in
the haps the tarrasque, while others claim it's a deposed
bodies of living creatures, and think it’s their duty duke of the Nine Hells, a banished elemental prince,
to return others to the primal waters by drowning or even a near-dead deity. Evil creatures sometimes
them or shedding their blood. lurk in the marshes, seeking to free the prisoner or
claim some power from it.
Characters might also venture to Elysium to seek
out some ancient spirit on the Heroic Isles. When
faced with the once-a-millennium task of forestall-
ing a prophesied disaster, characters might consult
with the valorous knight who accomplished the
deed a thousand years ago.

CHAPTER 6| COSMOLOGY 191

ETHEREAL PLANE Normally, creatures in the Border Ethereal can't
attack creatures on the overlapped plane, and vice
‘The Ethereal Plane is a misty, fogbound dimension.
versa. A traveler on the Ethereal Plane is impercep-
Its “shores,” called the Border Ethereal, overlap the
tible to someone on the overlapped plane, and solid
Material Plane, the Feywild, the Shadowfell, and the
objects on the overlapped plane don’t hamper the
Inner Planes, and every location on those planes has
movement of a creature in the Border Ethereal. The
a corresponding location on the Ethereal Plane. Vis-
exceptions are certain magical effects (including
ibility in the Border Ethereal is usually limited to 60
anything made of magical force) and living beings.
feet. The plane’s depths comprise a region of swirl-
This makes the Ethereal Plane ideal for scouting,
ing mist and fog called the Deep Ethereal, where
spying on opponents, and moving around without
visibility is usually limited to 30 feet.
Characters can use the Etherealness spell to enter
being detected. The Ethereal Plane also disobeys the
laws of gravity; a creature there can freely move in
the Border Ethereal, The Plane Shift spell allows
any direction.
transport to the Border Ethereal or the Deep Ethe-
real, but unless the intended destination is a specific
Deep ETHEREAL
location or a teleportation circle, the point of arrival
To reach the Deep Ethereal, one typically needs a
could be anywhere on the plane.
Plane Shift spell, a Gate spell, or a magical portal.

BorpeR ETHEREAL Visitors to the Deep Ethereal are engulfed by roiling
mist. Scattered throughout the plane are curtains
From the Border Ethereal, a traveler can see into
of vaporous color, and passing through a curtain
whatever plane it overlaps, but that plane appears
leads a traveler to a region of the Border Ethereal
grayish and indistinct, its colors blurring into each
connected to a specific Inner Plane, the Material
other and its edges turning fuzzy, limiting visibil-
Plane, the Feywild, or the Shadowfell. The color of
ity to 30 feet into the other plane. Conversely, the
the curtain indicates the plane whose Border Ethe-
Ethereal Plane is usually imperceptible to those on
real the curtain conceals; see the Ethereal Curtains
the overlapped planes, except with the aid of magic.
table. The curtains are also distinguishable by
texture and temperature, each one reflecting some-
thing ofthe nature of the plane beyond.

Twe Raoianr Crraoes is

REFUGE nN THe ErweREAL

ETHEREAL CURTAINS ingenuity and collaboration of twenty-seven grea
t
1d12_ Plane Curtain Color civilizations on the Material Plane. Abandoned
and
1-2 Material Plane lost for ages, the Radiant Citadel was resurrec
Turquoise ted
from its slumber and reclaimed by descendants of
3 Shadowfell Dusky gray
those societies,
4 Feywild Opalescent ‘The Radiant Citadel is a nexus of diplomacy and
5 Elemental Plane of Air Pale blue trade, a repository of histories and secrets, and
a
6 thriving sanctuary for those seeking safety or a
Elemental Plane of Earth Chestnut bet-
ter life. The floating city is a miracle of architecture
7 Elemental Plane of Fire Orange carved out of a single, massive fossil that
snakes
8 Elemental Plane of Water Green around a colossal gemstone shard known as the
9 Para-elemental Plane of Ash Auroral Diamond. The luminescence of the Auro
Dark gray ral
Diamond is mirrored in the constellation of fifteen
10 Para-elemental Plane of ce Aquamarine
structure-sized gemstones, the Concor
d Jewels,
11 Para-elemental Plane of Maroon that orbit the city and provide transportation to
the
Magma
far-flung homes of the city’s founding civilizations,
12 Para-elePlan
me e nt
of al
Ooze In the haze of the Ethereal Plane, the Auroral
Chocolate Di-
amond is a scintillating beacon visible fro
m miles
‘Traveling through the Deep Ethereal is unlike
away. The diamond seems to have moods, chan
ging
physical travel. Distance is meaningless, so although
colors unpredictably, but it is always visible for
travelers feel as if they can move by
a simple act of wanderers lost and in need.
t's impossible to measure speed and hard to Just beyond the city whirls a massive ether
track the passage of time. A trip through the Dee
p cyclone known as the Keening Gloom—a looming
Ethereal takes 1d10 « 10 hours from one curtain
to threat that's a grim reminder of the Radiant
another, regardless ofthe origin and destination.
In del’s precarious position.
combat, creatures move at their normal speeds.
Heroes and paupers meet on equal footing in
the
Radiant Citadel. By common agreement, power and
ETHER CYCLONES
resources are equitably shared. Dignity is afforded
An ether cyclone is a serpentine column that
spins
to all, and great need is met with great aid.
through the plane. The cyclone appears abruptly
,
distorting and uprooting everything in its path ETHEREAL PLANE ADVENTURES
and carrying the debris for miles. Traveler
s with Adventurers typically use the Ethereal Plan
a Passive Perception score of 15 or higher rece e to
ive travel from one place to another, either
skirting
I minute of warning: a deep thrum in the ethereal
around Material Plane obstacles on the Border
matter. Travelers who can't reach a curtain or por-
Ethereal or venturing into the Deep Ethereal to
tal leading elsewhere suffer the cyclone's effe
ct. Roll travel to the Inner Planes.
1420 and consult the Ether Cyclone table to dete
r- The Radiant Citadel can serve as a home base
for
mine the effect on all creatures in the vicinity.
any campaign built around the idea of exploring
new worlds. Several such worlds are introduced in
ETHER CYCLONE
Journeys through the Radiant Citadel, an anthology
of
1420 Effect short adventures.
1-12 Extended journey. Each character in a group
traveling together makes a DC 15 Charisma
saving throw. If at least half the group suc-
ceeds, travel is delayed by 1410 hours. Oth-
erwise, the journey's travel time is doubled.
13-19 Blown toa location in the Border Ethereal
overlapping a random plane (roll on the

Ethereal Curtains table)
20 Hurled to a random destination on the
Astral Plane

RADIANT CITADEL
Against the unending mist and unseen
terrors
of the Ethereal Plane, the Radiant Citadel stan
ds
bright as a bastion of hope. It's a living relic ofthe

CHAPTER 6| COSMOLOGY 193
3
S

When the DaAGon’s TeaR comer anpeané

Avove Finestonm Peak, re Vast Gare roRMs A

Ri0ce ro THe Fan Resim

Far REALM civilization imploded in bloody terror, and the
portal’s location—even its home world—is long for-
The Far Realm is outside the known multiverse. In
gotten. Lost portals might still exist, marked by an
fact, it might be an entirely separate universe with
alien magic that transforms the surrounding area.
its own physical and magical laws. Where stray en-
ergies from the Far Realm leak onto another plane, Far REALM ADVENTURES
matter
is warped into alien shapes that defy under- The Far Realm is the home of entities so far beyond
standable geometry and biology. Aberrations such mprehension that mortals can't fathom their mo-
as mind flayers and beholders areeither from this, tivations. To see these beings is to become lost in
plane or shaped by its strange influence. their magnitude and the evidence that mortals have
The entities that abide in the Far Realm are too never, will never, and could never matter to the cos-
alien for mortal minds to accept without strain. mos at large.
Titanic creatures swim through nothingness there, Adventures involving travel to the Far Realm or
and unspeakable beings whisper awful truths to its influence seeping into the Material Plane might
those who dare listen. For mortals, knowledge of touch on fundamental questions of what it means
the Far Realm is a struggle of the mind to over- to bea person, what mental and bodily autonomy
come the boundaries of matter, space, and rational mean and their value, and whether mortals have
thought. Some Warlocks embrace this struggle by any control over their fate or any importance in the
forming pacts with entities there. Anyone who has grand scheme ofthings. (It’s an especially good idea
seen the Far Realm mutters about eyes, tentacles, to review your players’ limits that might pertain to
and horror. such issues before planning an adventure exploring
The Far Realm has no well-known portals, or these themes, as discussed in the “Ensuring Fun for
at least none that are still viable, Ancient elves All” section in chapter 1.)
once opened a vast portal to the Far Realm within
a mountain called Firestorm Peak, but their

CHAPTER
6 |

FEYWILD the music of hooting owls and croaking frogs. The
Fey of the Gloaming Court shun the formalized
The Feywild, also called the Plane of Faerie, is a
etiquette and rituals of the Summer Court (see be-
land of soft lights and wonder, a place of music and
low), instead prizing behavior that is intuitive and
magic. The plane responds to unfettered emotion:
instinctual.
flowers turn and tremble in the presence ofa heated
Prismeer. Prismeer is a large domain belonging to
argument, grass withers under the feet of one who
the archfey Zybilna, It encompasses a vast swamp
seethes with malice, and birds chip merrily in the
presence of those who are joyous and squawk an-
called Hither; an ancient forest named Thither;
and a stormy, mountainous landscape called Yon.
grily at those who are dour.
Zybilna resides in the Palace of Heart's Desire,
Time and distance in the Feywild are mutable, as
situated where the three portions of her realm
is the plane's geography. Roads are uncommon, and
meet. As its name suggests, the palace is fabled as a
the ones that exist change as frequently as the land
destination for anyone seeking their heart's desire.
around themselves. Feywild natives are accustomed
On some worlds, Zybilna is regarded as a fairy god-
to the plane's mutability, but it can be terribly dis-
mother of sorts, granting wishes for the lost, the
orienting to visitors.
forsaken, or the betrayed. Sometimes her wishes
‘The Feywild exists in parallel to the Material
bring happiness, other times despair. (Prismeer is
Plane as an alternate dimension that occupies the
detailed in The Wild Beyond the Witchlight.)
same cosmological space. When moving from the
‘Summer Court. Ruled by the archfey Queen
Material Plane to the Feywild, travelers usually find
Titania, the Summer Court is the most settled and
themselves in a location similar to the one they left,
pastoral domain in the Feywild. Wrapped in the
but more marvelous and magical—and often more
warmth of
a perpetual summer day, with fluttering
vibrant and colorful, too, Adventurers climbing a
butterflies and a riot of colorful flowers, the lands of
volcano on the Material Plane might suddenly find
the Summer Court mimic the trappings of courtly
themselves scaling a Feywild mountain topped with
life in some realms of the Material Plane. The resi-
skyscraper-sized crystals that glow with internal
dents ofthis court wear elegant clothing and value
fire. Leaving behind a wide and muddy river on the
elaborate ceremony and ritualized etiquette, and the
Material Plane, characters might appear beside a
Fey are quick to shun those who flout the Summer
clear and winding brook whose waters glitter like
Court's baroque rules.
diamonds in the Feywild. In the heart of a dismal
marsh might lie a portal leading to a vast bog filled
Fry Crossincs
with eerie lights and sinister shapes twisting in the
Fey crossings are places of mystery and beauty
water. And moving to the Feywild from old ruins on
on the Material Plane that have a near-perfect
the Material Plane might put a traveler at the door mirror in the Feywild, creating a portal where the
of an archfey’s castle.
two planes touch. A traveler passes through a fey
crossing by entering a clearing, wading into a pool,
Domains oF DELIGHT
passing into a circle of mushrooms, or crawling un-
Much of the Feywild is governed by powerful Fey
der the trunk of a tree. To the traveler, it seems like
called archfey. The area under
a particular archfey's
simply moving into the Feywild, To an observer, the
‘command~called a Domain of Delightreflects the
traveler is there one moment and gone the next.
character and desires of its ruler. Some domains
Like other portals between planes, most fey
are bright and cheery, bathed in perpetual sunlight
crossings open infrequently. A crossing might open
and awash in colorful wildflowers, while others
only during
a full moon, on the dawn of
a particu-
are gloomy and drab, cast in unending twilight.
lar day, or for someone carrying
a certain type of
Most of them change with the emotional state of
item. A fey crossing can be closed permanently if
their rulers.
the land on either side is dramatically altered—for
The following sections describe a handful of the
example, if a castle is built over the clearing on the
best-known Domains of Delight.
Material Plane.
Fablerise. The domain of a story-spinning spider
archfey named Yarnspinner, Fablerise is a rambling FEywiLp Macic
thicket of twisted roots, thorny vines, and sinuous
Tales speak of children kidnapped by Fey creatures
creepers. This vegetation weaves together to form and spirited away to the Feywild, only to return
long tunnels, grand hallways, and enormous domes.
to their parents years later without having aged a
Yarnspinner loves reading stories to the animals
day and with no memories of their captors or the
that occupy his domain, realm they came from. Likewise, adventurers who
Gloaming Court. The Queen of Air and Darkness
return from an excursion to the Feywild are often
rules the Gloaming Court, a realm of twilight, fire
alarmed to discover upon their return that time
flies, cobwebs, and autumn leaves accompanied by

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 195

|
|

flows differently on the Plane of Faerie and that the Feywitp Time Warp
memories oftheir visit are hazy. You can use these
1420 Result
optional rules to reflect the strange magic that suf-
fuses the plane. 1-2 Days become minutes

Memory Loss. A creature that leaves the Feywild 3-6 Days become hours
makes a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. Fey creatures
7-13 No change
automatically succeed on the saving throw, as do
14-17 Days become weeks
creatures that have the Fey Ancestry trait, such
as elves. Ona failed save, the creature remembers 18-19 Days become months
nothing from its time spent in the Feywild. On a 20 Days become years
successful save, the creature's memories remain
intact but are a little hazy. Any spell that can end a FEYWILD ADVENTURES
curse can restore the creature's lost memories ‘The Feywild gives physical expression to powerful
Time Warp. While time seems to pass normally in emotion and excels at metaphor, When characters
the Feywild, characters might spend a day there and venture into the Feywild, they might find them-
realize, upon leaving the plane, that less or more selves robbed of a cherished memory or deep regret,
time has elapsed everywhere else in the multiverse. then later find the stolen memories embodied in lit-
Whenever a creature or group ofcreatures leaves tle figurines or lockets. A mischievous sprite might
the Feywild after spending at least 1 day on that sneak up behind a character who is laughing loudly
plane, you can choose a time change that works and steal their laughter, bbing the character of
best for your campaign, if any, or roll on the Fey- ite is found and the
wild Time Warp table. A Wish spell can be used
to remove the effect on up to ten creatures. Some of lovely flowers—reclaimed.
powerful Fey have the ability to grant such wishes
and might do soif the beneficiaries agree to subject
themselves to a Geas spell and complete a quest after
the Wish spell is cast.

Fey Reve in tHE Guoamine Coury

GEHENNA HADES
Avoleanic mountain dominates each of the four The layers of Hades are called the Three Glooms—
layers of Gehenna, and lesser volcanic earthbergs places without joy, hope, or passion. A gray land
drift in the air and smash into the greater moun- with an ashen sky, Hades is the destination of many
tains. The rocky slopes of the plane make movement souls that are unclaimed by gods or Fiends. These
difficult and dangerous. The ground inclines at least souls become larvae and spend eternity in this
45 degrees almost everywhere. In places, steep cliffs place, which lacks a sun, a moon, stars, or seasons.
and deep canyons present more challenging obsta- Leaching away color and emotion, the gloom on this
cles. Hazards include voleanic fissures that vent plane is more than most visitors can stand,
noxious fumes or searing flames,
Gehenna is the birthplace of yugoloths, greedy Layers or Haves
and selfish Fiends that dwell here in great numbers. Layer

Oinos Alland of dead-gray ash, stunted trees,
LaveRs OF GEHENNA
and virulent disease is stalked by rov-
Layer Description ing bands of Fiends looking for a fight
Khalas Lava illuminates clouds ofvolcanic ash or recruits for the Blood War.
and steam from the River Styx.
Niflheim Gray pine trees blanket rolling hills
Chamada Constant lava flows and eruptions and rocky bluffs, and thick mists coil
make overland travel difficult. Iron
around their trunks.
zeppeiins piloted by yugoloths drift
Pluton Shriveled willows, olive trees, and
through the constant gray ashfall.
poplars contribute to the gloom of this
Mungoth Acidic ash mingles with falling snow concentration of the deepest despair in
on this freezing layer, the multiverse.
Krangath ‘The Dead Furnace is a great mountain
suspended in silence and darkness, PLANE oF GLOOM
home to a coterie of liches. At the end of each Long Rest taken on the plane, a
visitor makes a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. On
GEHENNA ADVENTURES a failed save, the creature gains 1 Exhaustion level
Gehenna is the plane ofsuspicion and greed, with that can't be removed while the creature is in Ha-
no space for mercy or compassion. Adventures des. If the creature reaches 6 Exhaustion levels, it
on this plane might be an opportunity to explore doesn't die. Instead, it permanently transforms into
themes of betrayal, examining how characters be- a Larva, whereupon all Exhaustion levels afflicting
have when tensions run high and they can trust no the creature are removed.
‘one—perhaps not even each other. (See “Environ-
Hapes ADVENTURES
mental Effects” in chapter 3 for one way this atmo-
Hades embodies despair manifested as apathy. Pure,
sphere can manifest.) Characters might encounter
undiluted evil is like an inescapable force of gravity,
people in need who turn out to be yugoloths in
dragging all creatures down—not in body, but in
disguise, pitting the characters’ growing suspicion
spirit. Even the consuming rage ofthe Abyss and
against their empathy and compassion.
the devious plotting of the Nine Hells are subju-
Characters might make their way to the Teardrop
gated to hopelessness in the Gray Wastes of Hades.
Palace on Khalas to purchase something they can’t
The plane slowly kills dreams and desires, draining
find elsewhere, probably at a terrifying cost. This
hope and optimism from formerly fiery spirits.
bustling market, crowded with Fiends and occa-
‘An adventure in Hades can challenge characters
sional mortal visitors, offers all manner of forbidden
to find an answer to the ever-present question that
and sinister goods for sale. Its name comes from its
hangs over this plane: why bother? As apathetic
shape: the point is on the palace's uphill side so it
despair saturates their hearts and spirits, they must
diverts the ever-present lava flow to either side of
find a way to rekindle the passion of life and the
the structure,
sense of purpose that drives them or else succumb
Or characters could try to infiltrate the Tower
to the hopelessness of the plane.
Arcane in search of some great secret from yugo-
‘Adventurers might pursue a hag, a lich, or another
loths' ancient history. The tower, a sinister struc-
evil spellcaster who comes to Hades to collect lar-
ture adorned with blades and spikes and guarded by
vae for vile purposes. Once they are in the Three
arcanaloths, stands somewhere on Chamada. It is
Glooms, the adventurers risk becoming trapped by
rumored to hold yugoloths’ history and the records
the overwhelming despair of the place.
of their contracts.

CHAPTER 6 | COsMoLOGY 197

LimBo LIMBO ADVENTURES
Limbo is a plane of pure chaos, a roiling soup of Limbo is change. That constant churn is most

impermanent matter and energy. Stone melts into easily discerned in the ever-shifting physical form

water that freezes into metal, then turns into dia- of elements altering and reconfiguring in the vast
mond that burns up into smoke that becomes snow, expanse of the plane, but it applies just as much on
a mental and emotional level. Visitors to the plane
and on and on in an endless, unpredictable process
of change. Fragments of more ordinary land- find themselves caught up in a storm of intrusive
scapes-bits of forest, meadow, ruined castles, and thoughts and unruly emotions, forcing them to con-

even burbling streams—drift through the disorder. front the transient nature of so much of what they

The whole plane is a nightmarish riot. think of as their identity. The key to success on this

Limbo has no gravity, so creatures visiting the plane—both in shaping the physical environment
plane float in place. A creature can move up to its and in mastering the internal landscape of chaos—is
Speed in any direction by merely thinking of the asserting one's sense ofself, identifying what is un-
desired direction of travel. changing amid the storm of constant change.
Limbo has no layers—or if it does, the layers The sanctuaries of the githzerai are among the

continually merge and part, each is as chaotic as few havens that adventurers can hope to find on
the next, and distinguishing one from another this tumultuous plane. Although githzerai aren't
impossible. generally hostile to visitors who come in peace, they
don't welcome those who bring the chaos of Limbo
PoWER OF THE MIND with them: a tumultuous heart brought into a ref-
Limbo conforms to the will of the creatures inhab- uge can unravel the entire sanctuary.
iting it. Creative imaginations can create whole Adventurers might also come to Limbo to ex-
islands of their own invention within the plane, plore the secrets of the Spawning Stone. Said to
sometimes maintaining those places for years. A have been created by Primus, the overlord of the
nonsapient creature such as a fish, though, might modrons, the Spawning Stone absorbs chaotic
have less than a minute before the pocket of water energy and makes it possible to shape enclaves of
surroundingit freezes, vanishes, or turns to glass. order in Limbo, but the chaotic energy it absorbs is
Slaadi live here and swim amid this chaos, creating responsible for the creation of slaadi.
nothing, whereas githzerai build entire monasteries
with their minds. MATERIAL PLANE
As a Magic action, a creature in Limbo can make Worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely diverse,
an Intelligence check to mentally move an object but it was not always so, Some legends speak of a
within 30 feet of itself that is on the plane and isn't primordial state, a single reality called the First,
being worn or carried. The DC depends on the ob- World, where many of the peoples and monsters
ject's size: DC 5 for Tiny, DC 10 for Small, DC 15 for that inhabit the worlds on the Material Plane orig-
Medium, DC 20 for Large, and DC 25 for Huge or inated. After the First World was shattered by a
larger. On a successful check, the creature moves great cataclysm, the many worlds were formed like
the object 5 feet plus a number of a feet equal to reflections or (in some cases) distortions of that
how much the total exceeded the DC. original reality.
Accreature can also take a Magic action to make Some myths describe a great tree that grew on
an Intelligence check to alter a nonmagical object the First World at the dawn oftime. Planted and
within 30 feet of itself that isn’t being worn or car- tended by the god Corellon, this tree was a seed-
ried. The DC is based on the object's size: DC 10 for ling of Yggdrasil, the World Tree that connects all
iny, DC 15 for Small, DC 20 for Medium, and DC the Outer Planes (see “Traveling the Outer Planes”
25 for Large or larger. On a successful check, the earlier in this chapter). When the First World was
creature changes the object into another nonliving destroyed, seeds from this great tree scattered into
form of the same size, such as turning
a boulder the void of the Material Plane. Legends say that
into a ball offire. these seeds sprouted and formed worlds of their
Finally, a creature in Limbo can take a Magic ‘own—all the myriad worlds that now constitute the
tion to make a DC 20 Intelligence check to stabilize Material Plane.
an area within a 30-foot-radius Sphere centered The most widely known worlds are the ones that
ona point it can see on the plane. On a successful have been published as official campaign settings
check, the creature prevents the area from being
al- for the D&D game over the years, many of which
tered by the plane for 24 hours or until the creature are shown on the D&D Settings table in chapter 5. If
takes this Magic action again. your campaign takes place in one of these settings,
your version of it can diverge wildly from what's
in print.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

TRAVELING BETWEEN WORLDS be located at or near the roots of the worlds—the
‘Transit between the worlds of the Material Plane is places where the seedlings of the First World’s great
rare but not impossible and can be accomplished in tree took root and grew into a new world.
a variety of ways. A nexus point can be a geographical feature,
The Dream of Other Worlds. Aided by magic, such as an enormous tree, a mountain or mesa, a
travelers can fall into a deep slumber and dream yawning cavern deep under the mountains, or a
themselves into a new realm. meteorite in an enormous crater. It might also be
The Great Journey. Characters can undertake an a constructed feature: a lonely tower or castle, a
epic voyage fraught with peril and obstacles to be bustling tavern, or even a city. Normally, visitors
overcome. One route leads through Wildspace and to these places return to the same world they came
across the Astral Plane aboard a vessel powered by from when they depart, but it’s also possible to use a
magic. (The “Astral Plane” section in this chapter nexus point to travel from one world to another. De-
describes Wildspace,) Itis also possible to travel pending on the place, shifting worlds might require
through the Shadowfell or the Feywild, though such the use of magic, an object from the desired destina-
routes are less charted and no less perilous. tion world as a sort of key, or nothing more than an
The Leap to Another Realm. The most direct act of will.
method involves the use ofspells such as Teleporta- Some nexus points exist in multiple worlds—but
tion Circle or Teleport, or magical portals like those not at the same time. They flit from world to world,
described in this chapter. This magic causes the user disappearing from one and appearing in another
to appear in a known teleportation circle or some according to a regular schedule. Such a place might
other location in another world. linger on one world for anywhere from a year to an
The Roots of the Worlds. Similar to magical por- hour before moving on to another, carrying every-
tals, nexus points are locations that exist in mul- one inside with it to a new world.
|
tiple worlds at the same time. These points might

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 199 |
|

MECHANUS MECHANUS ADVENTURES
Mechanus is where perfectly regimented order Mechanus embodies absolute order, and it influ-
reigns supreme. It consists of equal measures of ences those who spend time here. Individual con-
light and dark, and equal proportions of heat and sciousness is subordinated to the search for perfect
cold. On Mechanus, law is reflected in a realm of order, and “I” is ultimately subsumed into “we.”
gigantic clockwork gears, interlocked and turning An adventure on Mechanus might lead characters
according to their measure. The cogs seem to be to examine their individual egos in the light of
the
engaged in a calculation so vast that no deity can adventuring party. It might challenge a character to
fathom its purpose. Some theories hold that they set aside personal goals for the benefit of the group

are the clockwork of time throughout the cosmos— (or the greater cause of cosmic law), or alternatively
that time itself would stop if the gears ceased their it might encourage characters to assert their own

turning, Other theories propose that the cogs up- individual identities, distinct from the party and
hold the basic rules and order of the cosmos. possessing their own goals and needs.
Modrons are the primary inhabitants of Mecha-
nus and maintain its intricate clockworks. The
Mount CELEsTIA
plane is also home to the creator of the modrons: The Seven Heavens of Mount Celestia rise like
a godlike being called Primus, whose realm is a mountain from a shining Silver Sea to utterly
called Regulus. incomprehensible heights, with seven plateaus
Mechanus has no distinct layers. Each turning cog marking its seven heavenly layers. The plane is the
has its own force of gravity pulling toward its cen- model of justice and order, of celestial grace and
ter, with structures built on the faces of the cogs. endless mercy, where angels and champions of good
Some of the cogs are like small islands, while others guard against incursions of evil. It is one of the few
are hundreds of miles across. places on the planes where travelers can let down
their guard. Its inhabitants strive constantly to be

Toe Seven HEAVENS oF MOUNT

2 righteous as possible. Countless creatures aim On the edge of
a clear lake in Mertion stands the
*> reach the highest and most sublime peak of the city of Empyrea, renowned for the healing power of
sountain, but only the purest souls can. That peak its fountains and springs. Pilgrims from across the
Sills even the most jaded of travelers with awe, planes seek out the healers, hospitals, and restor-
The pervasive goodness of Mount Celestia be- ative magic found here.
stows blessings on creatures on the plane (see “En-
‘ironmental Effects” in chapter 3), NEGATIVE PLANE
Cupped like a bowl beneath the other planes, the
Layers OF MOUNT CELESTIA Negative Plane is the source of necrotic energy
Layer Descri that destroys the living and animates the Undead.

Lunia In the Silver Heaven, the holy water of A lightless void without end, itis a needy, greedy
plane, sucking the life out of anything that is vul-
the Silver Sea laps at the base of the
nerable. Heat, fire, and life itself are all drawn.
celestial mountain under a starry sky.
into the maw of this plane, which always hungers
Mercuria The Golden Heaven's tame slopes and for more.
lush valleys are bathed in golden light To an observer, there's little to see on the Negative
that evokes the hope ofa new dawn. Plane. It is a dark, empty place, an eternal pit where
Venya In the Pearly Heaven, terraced fields a traveler can fall until the plane steals away all
and tended woodlands dot the snowy light and life. Merely entering the plane is compa-
rable to the life-draining touch of a wraith, so only
slopes.
creatures that have Immunity to Necrotic damage
Solania In the Crystal Heaven, holy shrines
can survive there for long.
glitter under a silvery sky amid lumi- In some locations on the Negative Plane, the in-
nescent fog. tensity of the plane is so great that the negative en-
‘Mertion On the sweeping plains ofthe Plati- ergy folds in on itself, stabilizing into solid chunks
num Heaven, holy soldiers muster in of matter that devour light. These chunks, called
grand citadels for battles across the voidstones, are thought to be the source of Spheres
planes. of Annihilation and similar magical effects. Anything
that comes into contact with a voidstone is de-
jovar The Glittering Heaven, strewn with stroyed in seconds.
beautiful rubies and garnets, is home
to the seven-tiered Heavenly City. NEGATIVE PLANE ADVENTURES

Ghronias The Illuminated Heaven is an ineffable ‘An adventure on the Negative Plane is a face-to-face
confrontation with annihilation, which is unlikely
mystery.
to end well for the adventurers. Even if their magic
Mount CELEsTIA ADVENTURES enables them to survive the environment of the
‘The plane of ultimate law and good is sometimes
plane, the experience tends to drain all the vitality,
smagined to be the most boring place in the multi-
energy, and happiness from body and soul. The Neg~
ative Plane has all the apathy and despair of Hades
werse, but in truth Mount Celestia’s nature makes
= the target of unrelenting attacks by evil forces. and the Shadowfell, combined and concentrated in
The devils of the Nine Hells, in particular, long to an infinite expanse of nonbeing and uncreation.
corrupt the goodness of the Seven Heavens. The
Nine HELLS
segoloths of the Lower Planes covet the wealth
‘sf the plane, particularly the mines of Solania and The Nine Hells inflames the imaginations oftrav-
she scattered gems of Jovar. And the demons of the elers, the greed oftreasure seekers, and the battle
Abyss would like nothing better to smear their filth fury of all moral creatures. It is the ultimate plane
en the gleaming purity of Mount Celestia. of law and evil, and the epitome of premeditated
But while Fiends of all sorts launch doomed as- cruelty. The devils of the Nine Hells are bound to
-saults on the shores of Lunia, evil's true foothold obey the laws of their superiors, but they squabble
on the plane is in the hearts of those well-meaning within their individual castes. Most undertake any
‘“isitors who bring their secret shame and hidden plot, no matter how foul, to advance themselves. At
Ses to the holy mountain, An adventure in Mount the very top of the hierarchy is Asmodeus, who has
Celestia is an opportunity for characters to prove yet to be bested. If he were vanquished, the victor
shemselves worthy of the many blessings it offers— would rule the plane in turn, Such is the law of the
ec to become worthy by forswearing the selfishness, Nine Hells.
seed, and hatred that lurk in their hearts.

CHAPTER 6| COSMOLOGY 201

Tre Nine Layers Zariel appears as an angel whose skin and wings
The Nine Hells has nine layers. The first eight are are scorched. Her eyes burn with a furious white
ruled by archdevils who answer to Asmodeus, the light that can cause creatures looking upon her to
archduke of Nessus, the ninth layer. Collectively, the burst into flame. Her seat of power is a flying basalt
rulers ofthe Hells are called the Lords of the Nine. citadel that rakes the battlefields of Avernus,
To reach Nessus, one must descend through all eight Dis. Dis, the second layer of the Nine Hells, is a
layers above it in order. The most expeditious means labyrinth of canyons wedged between sheer moun-
of doing so is the River Styx, which plunges ever tains rich with iron ore. Iron roads span and wend
deeper as it flows from one layer to the next. Only through the canyons, watched over by the garrisons
the most courageous adventurers can withstand the of iron fortresses perched atop jagged pinnacles.
torment and horror ofthat journey. The second layer takes its name from its current
The Layers of the Nine Hells table summarizes lord, Dispater. A manipulator and deceiver, the
each layer; detailed descriptions of these layers fol- archduke is devilishly handsome, bearing only small
low the table. horns, a tail, and a cloven left hoof to distinguish
him from a human. His crimson throne stands in
Layers OF THE NINE HELLS the heart of the Iron City ofDis, a hideous metrop-
Layer Description olis. Planar travelers come here to conspire with
devils and to close deals with night hags, rakshasas,
Avernus The Blood War rages across battle-
incubi, succubi, and other Fiends. Contracts signed
fields littered with corpses and the
on his layer contain special provisions that allow
wreckage of hellish war machines. Dispater to collect a cut ofthe deal.
Dis Iron roads in deep canyons lead to the Dispater is one of Asmodeus's most loyal and re-
dreaded Iron City of Dis. sourceful vassals, and few beings in the multiverse
Minauros Acid falls like rain on putrid bogs and can outwit him. He is more obsessed than most
devils with striking deals with mortals in exchange
decaying cities.
for their souls, and his emissaries work tirelessly to
Phlegethos Obsidian fortresses bask in the heat of
foster evil schemes on the Material Plane.
raging volcanoes and magma rivers
Minauros. The third layer of the Nine Hells is a
Stygia Levistus's prison is a frigid hellscape of stench-ridden bog. Acidic rain spills from the layer's
jagged ice and cold fire. brown skies, thick layers of scum cover its putrid
Malbolge An ever-crumbling mountain threatens surface, and yawning pits liein wait beneath the
murk to engulf careless wanderers.
to bury visitors.
Cyclopean cities of ornately carved stone rise up
Maladomini Swarms of hungry flies plague dead
from the bog, including the great city of Minauros,
cities surrounded by utter desolation. for which the layer is named. The slimy walls of the
Cania Ice-trapped cities provide shelter in a city rise hundreds of feet, protecting the flooded
realm cold enough to freeze the soul. halls that are the lair of Mammon, the archduke of

Nessus Mighty fortresses stand watch over the Minauros. Mammon resembles a massive serpent
with the upper torso and head of a hairless, horned
deepest pits of the Nine Hells.
humanoid. Mammon’s greed is legendary, and he is
Avernus. By Asmodeus's orders, no planar portals one of the few archdevils who will trade favors for
connect directly to the lower layers of the Nine gold instead of souls. His lair is piled high with trea-
Hells. The first layer, Avernus, is the arrival point sures left behind by those who tried—and failed—to
for visitors, a rocky wasteland with rivers of blood best him in a deal.
and clouds ofbiting flies. Fiery comets occasionally Phlegethos. Phlegethos, the fourth layer, isa fiery
fall from the darkened sky and carve out fuming landscape whose seas of molten magma brew hurri-
impact craters. Empty battlefields are littered with canes of hot wind, choking smoke, and volcanic ash.
‘weapons and bones, showing where the legions of Within the fire-filled caldera of Phlegethos's largest
the Nine Hells prevailed against invading enemies, volcano rises Abriymoch, a fortress city made of
The archdevil Zariel rules Avernus, having sup- obsidian and dark glass. With rivers of molten lava
planted her rival, Bel, who fell out of Asmodeus's fa~ pouring down its outer walls, the city resembles the
vor and was forced to serve as Zariel’s adviser. Tia- sculpted centerpiece of a gigantic, hellish fountain.
mat, the Queen of Evil Dragons, is a prisoner on this Abriymoch is the seat of power for the two arch-
layer, ruling her own domain but confined to the devils who rule Phlegethos in tandem: Belial and
Nine Hells by Asmodeus in accordance with some Fierna, Belial's daughter. Both are handsome devils
ancient contract (the terms of which are known who resemble tieflings, with red skin and small
only to Tiamat and the Lords of the Nine). horns. Belial exudes civility, even as his words carry

202 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

AN ETERNAL BaTTLErieLO in THe BLooo Waa.

ee

an undercurrent of threat. His daughter is said to regain Asmodeus's favor. Malbolge is a seemingly
have the wickedest heart in the Nine Hells. The al- endless slope, like the sides of an impossibly huge
fiance of Belial and Fierna is unbreakable, for both mountain. Parts of the layer break off from time
e aware that their mutual survival hinges on it to time, creating deadly, booming avalanches. The
Stygia. The fifth layer of the Nine Hellsis a freez~ inhabitants of Malbolge live in crumbling fortresses
ing realm of ice within which cold flames burn. A and great caves carved into the mountainside.
‘ozen sea surrounds the layer, and its gloomy sky Malbolge's current ruler isAsmodeus's daughter,
ackles with lightning. Glasya. Her cruelty and love
of wicked schemes
Archduke Levistus once betrayed Asmodeus
and val those of her father. The citadel that serves as her
's now encased deep in the ice ofStygia as punish- domicile on the slopes of Malbolge, called Osseia, is
int. He rules this layer all the same, communicat- supported by cracked pillars and buttresses that are
ing telepathically with his followers and servants, sturdy yet seem on the verge of collapse. Beneath
h in the Nine Hells and on the Material Plan. the palace is a labyrinth lined with cells and torture
Stygia is also home to its previous ruler, the s chambers, where Glasya confines and torments
entine archdevil Geryon, who was dismissed by those who displease her.
smodeus to allow the imprisoned Levistus to re- Maladomini. The seventh layer, Maladomini, is
zain his rule. Geryon’s fall from grace has spurred ruin-covered wasteland. Dead cities form a des
much debate within the infernal courts. No one is olate urban landscape, and between them are
tain whether Asmodeus had some secret cause to empty quarries, crumbling roads, slag heaps, the
dismiss the archdevil or whether he is testing Gery- hollow shells of empty fortresses, and swarms of
n’s allegiance for some greater purpose hungry flies.
Malbolge. Malbolge, the sixth layer, has outlasted The archduke of Maladomini is Baalzebul, the
many rulers, among them Malagard the Hag Count- Lord
of Flies. He is a tall, powerful devil with the
ss and the archdevil Moloch. Malagard fell out of compound eyes of a fly. The archduke has long con-
or and was struck down by Asmodeus in a fit of spired to usurp Asmodeus, yet has failed at every
pique, while her predecessor, Moloch, still linger turn. Asmodeus laid
a curse on him that causes any
somewhere on the sixth layer
as an imp, plotting to deal made with him to lead to calamity. Asmodeus

CHAPTER6| COSMOLOGY 203

occasionally shows Baalzebul favor for reasons no Nessus. The lowest layer ofthe Nine Hells, Nes-
other archduke can fathom, though some suspect sus is a realm of dark pits whose walls are set with
that Asmodeus still respects the worthiness of this bleak fortresses. There, pit fiend generals loyal to
adversary. Asmodeus garrison their diabolical legions and plot
Cania, Cania, the eighth layer of the Nine Hells, the conquest of the multiverse. At the center of
is a frozen hellscape whose ice storms can tear the layer stands a vast rift of unknown depth, out
flesh from bone. Cities embedded in the ice provide of which rises the great citadel-spire of Malsheem,
shelter for guests and prisoners of Cania’s ruler, the home to Asmodeus and his infernal court.
brilliant and conniving archdevil Mephistopheles. Malsheem resembles a gigantic hollowed-out
Mephistopheles dwells in the ice citadel of stalagmite. The citadel is also a prison for souls
Mephistar, where he plots to seize the throne of the that Asmodeus has locked away for safekeeping.
Nine Hells and conquer
all the planes, He is Asmo- Convincing him to release even one ofthose souls,
deus's greatest enemy and ally, and the archduke of comes at a steep price, and it is rumored that A:
Nessus appears to trust Mephi »pheles's counsel. modeus has claimed whole kingdoms in the past
Mephistopheles knows he can't depose Asmodeus exchange for such favor
until his adversary makes a fatal miscalculation, Asmodeus most often appears as a handsome,
and so both wait to discover what circumstances bearded man with four large horns, piercing red
might turn them against each other. Mephistopheles eyes, and flowing robes. He can also assume other
is also a godfather of sorts to Glasya, further com- forms and sometimes carries a ruby-tipped scepter.
plicatithe
ng relationship between Mephistophel Asmodeus is the most cunning and well-mannered
and Asmodeus. of archdevils. On the surface, he seems warm, pleas-
Mephistophelesis a tall, striking devil
with im- ant, and lighthearted, doling out wisdom and small
sive horns and a cool demeanor. He trades in acts of kindness like a caring father. The ultimate
, as do other archdevils, but he rarely gives hi evil he represents can be seen only when he wills it
time to any creatures not worthy of his personal 30, or if he forgets himself and flies into a rage.
attention, Itis said that only Asmodeus has ever
deceived or thwarted him,

Asmooeus, THE Lono oF rhe Nine

ry

INFERNAL HIERARCHY status, but the demoted devil retains its memories—
‘The Nine Hells has a rigid hierarchy that defines and might seek vengeance if the severity ofthe de-
every aspect of its society. Asmodeus is the supreme motion is excessive.
ruler of all devils and wields the power of
a lesser No devil can promote or demote another devil
god. Worshiped as such on the Material Plane, that hasn't sworn fealty to it, preventing rival arch-
Asmodeus inspires evil cults and sinister War- devils from demoting each other's most powerful
locks. In the Nine Hells, he commands scores of pit servants. Since all devils swear fealty to Asmodeus,
fiend generals, which in turn command legions of he can freely demote any other devil, transforming
subordinates. it into whatever infernal form he desires.
A supreme tyrant, a brilliant deceiver, and a mas-
Nine HELLS ADVENTURES
ter of subtlety, Asmodeus protects his throne by
The Nine Hells embodies the cruelty and corrup-
keeping his friends close and his enemies closer. He
tion oflaw turned to evil ends. The devils of the
delegates most matters of rulership to the pit fiends
Nine Hells are more cunning, more insidious, and
and lesser archdevils that make up the infernal bu-
reaucracy of the Nine Hells, even as he knows that
far more dangerous than other Fiends. Their intel-
ligence, their delight in deceit and manipulation,
those powerful devils conspire to usurp his throne.
and their unhindered pursuit of their own agendas
Asmodeus appoints archdevils, and he can strip any
make them truly terrifying foes.
member ofthe infernal hierarchy of rank and status
A descent into the Nine Hells is a journey into the
as he likes.
heart of evil. Every shred of evil is used in the Nine
INFERNAL HIERARCHY Hells, and each layer specializes in some way to

Least Devils Greater Devils accommodate and exploit the vices and weaknesses
of mortals. Far too many people who make such a
1. Lemure 8. Horned devil
journey discover their own hearts aren't immune
Lesser Devils 9. Erinyes
to temptation and corruption, and they end up
2.1mp 10. Ice devil
making the Nine Hells their eternal home. To avoid
3. Spined devil 11. Pit fiend
such a fate, good-hearted adventurers must resist
4. Bearded devil Archdevils the insidious manipulation, deceit, and treachery of
5. Barbed devil 12. Duke/duchess devils, even when the devils promise to fulfill their
6. Chain devil 13, Archduke/archduchess deepest longings.
7. Bone devil
OUTLANDS
Archdevils. The archdevils include all the current
and deposed rulers of the Nine Hells, as well as ‘The Outlands lies between the Outer Planes. It is

the fiendish aristocrats that make up their courts, the plane of neutrality, keeping
all aspects of the
attend them as advisers, and hope to supplant them. planes in a paradoxical balance—simultaneously

Promotion and Demotion. When the soul of an concordant and in opposition. The plane has

evil mortal sinks into the Nine Hells, it takes on the varied terrain, with prairies, mountains, and
physical form ofa wretched lemure. Archdevils and shallow rivers.

greater devils can promote lemures to lesser devils. The Outlands is a great disk. In fact, those who

Archdevils can promote lesser devils to greater dev- envision the Outer Planes as a wheel point to the

ils, and Asmodeus alone can promote a greater devil Outlands as proof, calling it a microcosm of the
to archdevil status. All diabolic promotions involve planes. That argument might be circular, since the
a brief, painful transformation, with the devil's arrangement of the Outlands inspired the idea of
memories passing intact from one form to the next. the Great Wheel in the first place.
Low-level promotions are typically based on Evenly spaced around the outside edge ofthe
circle are the gate-towns: sixteen settlements, each
need, such as when a pit fiend transforms lemures
into imps to gain stealthy spies under its command. built around a portal leading to one of the Outer
High-level promotions are almost always based on Planes. The Gate-Towns of the Outlands table lists
merit, such as when a bone devil that distinguishes all sixteen gate-towns and the Outer Planes they
itselfin battle is transformed into a horned devil by connect to. Each gate-town shares many of the
the archdevil it serves. A devil is seldom promoted characteristics of the plane where its gate leads.
more than one step at a time. Planar emissaries often meet in these gate-towns, so
Demotion is the customary punishment for failure it isn't unusual to see strange interactions, such as a
or disobedience among the devils. Archdevils or Celestial and a Fiend arguing in a tavern while shar-
greater devils can demote a lesser devil to a lemure, ing a fine bottle of wine.
which loses all memory of its prior existence. An
archdevil can demote a greater devil to lesser devil

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY 205

Gate-TOWNs OF THE OUTLANDS PANDEMONIUM
Town Gate Destin: Pandemonium is a plane of overwhelming chaos,
Automata Mechanus a great mass of rock riddled with tunnels carved
Bedlam Pandemonium by howling winds. Itis cold, noisy, and dark, with
no natural light. Wind quickly extinguishes non-
Curst Carceri
magical open flames such as torches and campfires.
Ecstasy Elysium Italso makes conversation possible only by yell-
Excelsior Mount Celestia ing, and even then only to a maximum distance

Faunel Beastlands of 10 feet. See “Environmental Effects” in chap-

Fortitude Arcadia ter 3 for more information about the winds of
Pandemonium.
Glorium Ysgard Most of the plane's inhabitants are creatures that
Hopeless Hades were banished to the plane with no hope of escape.

Plague-Mort Abyss.
‘The incessant winds force them to take shelter in
places where the howls of the winds sound like dis-
Ribcage Nine Hells tant cries of torment.
Rigus Acheron
Sylvania Arborea Layers OF PANDEMONIUM

Torch Gehenna Layer Description
Tradegate Bytopia Pandesmos Howling winds, dark streams bound

Xaos
for the River Styx, and blowing snow
Limbo
pour through vast, desolate caverns.
OUTLANDS ADVENTURES Cocytus Winds blowing through narrower tun-
‘The Outlands is the closest the Outer Planes nels create a stronger force and louder
‘come to being like a world on the Material Plane. wails, making this the so-called “Layer
Adventurers can travel easily from one gate- of Lamentation.”
town to the next, making a tremendous variety
Phlegethon Tunnel walls absorb light while water
of planar-themed adventures possible within the
creates intricate rock formations.
boundaries of the Outlands.
Adventures in the Outlands often involve the con- Agathion Sealed-off tunnels are largely inaccessi-
flicts between opposing planar influences. It's much ble from elsewhere, making them ideal
easier for a slaad to wreak havoc in the gate-town as vaults for ancient secrets.
of Automata than it is for even a horde of slaadi to
accomplish anything in Mechanus itself. Celestial PANDEMONIUM ADVENTURES
spies and Fiend assassins carry out subtle plots and Pandemonium is the plane of last straws, The inces-
deadly sabotage across the Outlands, sant howling of its winds brings everyone on the
Despite these conflicts, the Outlands remains a plane, sooner or later, to the edge of lashing out in
plane of balance. Toward the center of the plane, frustration, breaking down in despair, or dissolving
away from the gate-towns, lie vast stretches of land into incoherence~and then some event, force, or
similar to the different environments found on creature on the plane pushes them over that edge.
worlds of the Material Plane. Preserving nature’s Simply existing on the plane is exhausting; trying to
balance from the pull of powerful extremes in any accomplish even a basic conversation is aggravating.
direction can also be a theme of adventures here. An adventure in Pandemonium can be a way to
Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse includes explore what happens to characters on their worst
extensive information on the Outlands. day, when everything goes wrong and the howling
wind won't let up. The trick is to convey the frustra-
tion that characters are bound to experience there
without transferring that frustration to the players.
A jagged spike somewhere in Cocytus, called
Howler's Crag, is rumored to have a unique magical
property: anything yelled from the top of the crag
is said to find the ears of its intended recipient—
carried on a shrieking, frigid wind—no matter
where in the multiverse that person might be.

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

-

*
PARA-ELEMENTAL PLANES
‘The Frostfell’s monsteand
rs bitter cold make it
The regions where the Elemental Planes collide and a dangerous place to travel. Most pla
nar voyagers
their elemental substances overla keep to the air, braving the powerful winds and
p are called
elemental Planes. driving snow to avoid setting foo
t on the great
glacier.
PLANE OF ASH
On the Plane of Ash, also cal PLANE OF MAGMA
led the Great Confla-
gration, howling winds from the Plane of Air mix The boundary between the Pla
ne of Earth and the
with the cinder storms and lava of Plane of Fire is a great range of volcanic mou
the Sea of Fire. nta ins.
This plane is an endless storm of flames, smoke, The Plane of Magma, also called the
Fountains
and ash. The thick ash obscur of Creation, is home to azer: . fir
es sight beyond a few e giants, and red
dozen feet, and the battering win dragons, as well as creatures fr
ds make travel om the neighboring
difficult. Here and there, ash cluste planes. Lava flows down the slopes
rs into flo ating of these moun-
realms where outlaws and tains toward the Plane
fugitives take shelter, of Fire.

PLANE oF Ice PLANE OF OozE
The Plane of Ice, also called the ‘The border region between the
Frostfell, forms Plane of Water and
the border between the Plane of Air the Plane of Earth is a horrid sw
and the Plane amp where gnarled
of Water. This plane is a seemingly end trees and thick, stingi
vinng
less glacier es grow from the dense
swept by constant, raging blizzards. Frozen cav- muck and slime. Here and there on
the Plane of
through the Plane of Ice, home to yeti Ooze (also called the Swamp of Oblivion), stag-
s,
white dragons, and other creatures nant lakes and pools play host to
thickets of weeds
of cold. The inhabitants of the and monstrous swarms of mosquitoes.
plane engage in a The few
never-ending battle to prove settlements here consist of wooden str
their strength and uctu
ensure their survival. pended above the muck on platforms betw

Visitors to the plane have sometimes tried elevatin
g SHADOWFELL
houses on poles stuck in the mud, but since no soli
d
earth underlies the muck, even such structures The Shadowfell, also called the Plane of Shadow
, is
eventually sink. a gloomy dimension whose sky is a black vault
with
It is said that any object cast into the Swamp neither sun nor stars.
of
Oblivion can't be found again for at least a century. The Shadowfell overlaps the Material Pla
ne in
Now and then, a desperate soul casts an much the same way as the Feywild. Aside from
Artifact of the
power into this place, keeping it away fro bleak landscape, it appears similar to the
m the rest Material
of the multiverse for a time. The promise of power- Plane. Travelers from the Material Plane
who enter
ful magic lures adventurers to brave the the Shadowfell often observe landmarks simi
monstrous lar
insects and hags of the swamp. to the world they left, but distorted and
often sin-
ister. A mountain on the Material Pla
ne mig ht be
PARA-ELEMENTAL PLANE ADVENTURES replaced in the Shadowfell by a skull-sha
ped rock
The Para-elemental Planes are extreme envi
ron- outcropping, a heap of rubble, or the
crumbling ruin
ments but fundamentally similar to places fou ofa once-great castle. The forests of the Shadowfell
nd
on the Material Plane—the place whe hold sinister-looking trees, their branches reaching
re all four ele-
‘ments mingle freely. out to snare travelers’ cloaks, and
their roots coiling
Ata symbolic level, the Para-elemental Pla to trip those who pass by.
nes rep-
resent the interaction and sometimes Shadow dragons and Undead haunt this ble
the contrast
ak
between the forces and ideals embodied by thei plane, as do other creatures that thrive in the
r
constituent elements. The Plane of Ash gloom, including cloakers and darkmantl
, for exam- es.
ple, highlights the commonality between air
and
fire—the tendency to movement and change, given a SHADow Crossincs
destructive tone by the raging conflagra ‘Shadow crossings are locations where the
tion of the veil
plane. The Plane of Ooze heightens the
contrast be- between the Material Plane and the Shadowfell
tween stable, rigid earth and steadily flowing water. isso thin that creatures can pass fro
m one plane
to the other. A blot of shadow in the corner
of a
POSITIVE PLANE dusty crypt might be a shadow crossing, as migh
t
Like a dome above the other planes, the Posi an open grave. Shadow crossings
tive form in gloomy
Plane is the source ofradiant energy and the raw places where spirits or the stench of dea
th lingers,
life force that suffuses all living beings. Like the such as battlefields, graveyards, and tom
bs. They
heart ofa star, itis a continual furnace of creation, manifest only in darkness, closing as soon as they
a domain of brilliance beyond the ability feel light’s kiss,
of mortal
eyes to comprehend. Itis a vibrant plan
e, so alive Domatns oF DrEaD
that travelers are empowered by visi
ting it.
Ina far-flung corner of the Shadowfell drifts
The Positive Plane has no surface and is akin a hid-
den expanse of roiling mist and vague semireality.
to the Elemental Plane of Air with its wide-o
pen At this eerie edge of the multiverse, mysterious
nature, However, every bit of this plane
glows entities known as the Dark Powers coll
brightly with innate power. This power is ect the most
dangerous wicked beings from across ages and wor
to mortal forms, which can't handle it lds within
for long. Only
inescapable, mist-shrouded demiplanes. In thes
creatures that have Immunity to Radiant e
damage shadowy prisons, the villainous beings
can survive there, become
Darklords, able to exercise great power but
confined
Positive PLANE ADVENTURES to realms that twist their desires, capturing
them in
Vibrant life, creative energy, and radian cycles of dread and despair.
t health are
the essential characteristics ofthe Positive Plan ‘Mists surround each of the Domains
e, of Dread,
though touching this fundamental energy can making it difficult to leave one domain and
be even
Just as dangerous as entering the soul-s harder to find a path to another. The Mis
iphoning ts rise and
annihilation ofthe Negative Pla fall at the whim of the Dark Powers, and
ne. Characters who they can
survive an excursion into the Positive even slip across the planes to drag people unwi
Plane often t-
find that it leaves them with a lasting charge tingly into the dread domains. Those who live
, mak- in
ing it hard to calm down, to ste these domains ascribe all sorts ofsinister
m the flow of ideas, stories to
and even to sleep. On the other hand, the Mists—any supernatural happening,
they also find inexplica-
themselves with a persistent resistance ble disappearance, or malicious force
to disease can be blamed
and desp: on the Mists.

208 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

THE SHAOOWFELL 15 A REALM
OF OATH,

‘The following Domains of L ‘ad are among the whose efforts
to create life and abolish death have
most infamous. They are described
in more detail in led to th y
Van Richten’s Guide to Ravenloft. Mordent, Death in Mordent heralds the beginning
Barovia. The towering
spires of Castle Ravenloft of a haunted afterlife as a restless spirit, for this
loom above the valley of Barovia, which is ruled by domain is the realm of ghost stories and hauntings.
Strahd von Zarovich, the first vampit The dead here earn no rest, no finality, no peace
Borca. Amid opulent estates and impoverished just a passage into a shadow world of wispy phan-
villages,
two Darklords—the vicious poisoner toms, mournful groaning, and clanking chains.
Ivana Boritsi and the childishly cruel stalker Valachan. The devious hunter Chajuna roams the
Ivan Dilisnya—pursue their obsessive schemes. jungles ofher domain, hunting the most dangerous
Falkovnia. Empty countryside surrounds ruined beasts she can find. When she grows dissatisfied
or crumbling cities, with only a few pockets of civ- with simpler prey, she draws people into a fatal
ilization fighting
a losing battle against an endless contest, ensuring that the land remains steeped in
plague of zombies. General Vladeska Drakov com- blood.
mands a fierce military force that desperately clings
SHADOWFELL DESPAIR
to power
Kalakeri. A beautiful land of rainforests, rivers, A melancholic atmosphere pervades the Shadowfell,

and lakes isa quagmire of intrigue and despair as and extended forays to this plane can afflict charac-

three royal heirs—transformed into monsters by ters with despair
When you deem it appropriate, though usually
their depravity and hatred—battle endlessly to claim
the throne of their ancient dynasty. not more than once per
day, you can require
a cha

Lamordia. Inventors and scholars violate both acter not from the Shadowfell to make a DC 10 V
natural and moral laws ai the frozen bogs and dom saving throw. On a failed save, the character is

glacial expanses of Lamordia. The worst ofthem is affected
by despair. Roll on the Shadowfell Despair

the domain's Darklord,
Doctor Viktra Mordenheim,

CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLC

table to determine the effects. You can substitute "YSGARD
different despair effects of your own creation,
Ysgard is a rugged realm of soaring mountains, deep
SHADOWFELL Despair fjords, and windswept battlefields, with summers
that are long and hot and winters that are cold and
1d6 Effect
unforgiving. Its continents float above oceans of
1-3. Apathy
The
. character has Disadvantage on volcanic rock, below which are enormous icy cav-
Death Saving Throws and Initiative rolls. erns that hold entire kingdoms of giants, humans,
4-5. Dread. The characte
has
r Disadvantage on all dwarves, gnomes, and other beings. Heroes come
saving throws. to Ysgard to test their mettle not only against the
plane itself, but also against giants, dragons, and
6 Delusion. The character has Disadvantage
other mighty creatures across Ysgard’s vast terrain.
on ability checks and saving throws that use
Ysgard is the home of slain heroes who wage
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma,
ternal battle on fields of glory. Any creature, other

Ifa character is already suffering a despair effect than a Construct or Undead, that is killed in combat

and fails the saving throw, the new despair effect, while in Ysgard is restored to life at dawn the next

replaces the old one. After finishing a Long Rest, a day. The creature has al its Hit Points restored, and
character can attempt to overcome the despair all conditions that affected it before its death are
removed.
a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. (The DC is higher
because it's harder to shake off despair once it has,
taken hold) On a successful save, the despair effect
Layers OF YsGARD
ends for that character. A Calm Emotions spell or Layer Description
magic that removes curses cures the despair. Ysgard Immense rivers offloating earth grind
together in eternal rumbling.
SiciL, City or Doors
Muspelheim The ground smokes and burns be-
At the center of the Outlands, like the axle of a
neath the earthbergs ofthe top layer.
great wheel, is the Spire, a needle-shaped mountain
that rises high into the sky. Above this mountain's Nidavellir Floating chunks ofearth are closer
narrow peak, not part of the Outlands but a plane together, giving the appearance of
in its own right, floats the ring-shaped city of Sigil, endless tunnels with rich mineral
its myriad structures built on the ring’s inner sur- deposits.
face. Creatures standing on one of Sigil’s streets can
see the city curve up over their heads and—most YSGARD ADVENTURES
disconcerting of all—the far side of the city directly The nature of Ysgard is glory earned through heroic
overhead. Called the City of Doors, this bustling deeds in battle. It's the euphoria of an athlete, the
planar metropolis holds countless portals to other exhilaration ofa summer storm, and the trium-
planes and worlds. phant celebration of victory. Since those who die on
Sigil is a trader's paradise. Goods and information the plane return to life to fight again the next day,
come here from across the planes. The city sustains Ysgard can overlook the horrors of war and focus
a brisk trade in information about the planes, par- entirely on the glory.
ticularly the commands or items required for the ‘An adventure in Ysgard can be an opportunity
operation of particular portals. for lighthearted combat without consequences, for
The city is the domain of the inscrutable Lady of characters to prove their mettle against truly epic
Pain, a being whose purpose and goals are unknown foes and perhaps even against each other. Adven-
to even the sages of her city. She appears almost turers might find themselves on the Plain ofIda on
human, although she most definitely isn't. She wears the topmost layer of Ysgard, where daily festivals
ornate robes that shroud her body, and a mantle let warriors and athletes show off their bravery and
of blades coated in blue-green verdigris surrounds skill. Or they might venture into the lower layers
her masklike face. No one is certain who or what to face greater challenges—or secrets buried in the
exactly the Lady of Pain is, but it’s widely accepted deep caverns ofthe plane.
she's a being on par with deities. Is Sigil her prison?
Is she the fallen creator of the multiverse? No one
knows-or if they do, they aren't telling,
Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse includes
extensive information on Sigil.

210 CHAPTER 6 | COSMOLOGY

HOARD IN TWE RUINS OF Kak Teanori,

es >

CHAPTER

TREASURE
DVENTURERS STRIVE FOR MANY THINGS,

including glory, knowledge, and justice.
Corns
Many adventurers also seek something ‘The most basic type oftreasure is money, including
more tangible: treasure. This chapter presents Copper Pieces (CP), Silver Pieces (SP), Electrum

treasure in all its forms, from coins to magic items. Pieces (EP), Gold Pieces (GP), and Platinum Pieces
(PP). See the Player's Handbook for their relative
TREASURE THEMES value. Fifty coins of any type weigh 1 pound.

Monsters have treasure preferences, as explained
TRADE BARS
in the Monster Manual. These preferences are ex-
pressed as themes, which helps you determine what Because large numbers of coins can be difficult to
treasures are found in monsters’ hoards, as summa- transport and account for, many merchants prefer
rized in the Treasure Themes table. to use trade bars—ingots of precious metals and
For advice on how to include treasure in an alloys (usually silver). These bars are valued by

adventure, see “Adventure Rewards” in chapter 4. weight, as shown in the Trade Bars table,

To randomly determine a magic item found as
Trave Bars
treasure, use the tables at the end of this chapter.
Bar Value Dimensions
TREASURE THEMES
2pound silver bar 10GP Sin. long
x 2in.
Theme Appropriate Treasure wide x 1/2 in. thic
Arcana Gemstones plus magic items of
an S-pound silver bar 25 GP 6 in. long
x 2 in.
eldritch or esoteric nature wide x1 in. thick
Armaments Coins or trade bars plus magic items 5-pound gold bar 250 GP Sin. long
x 2in.
that are useful in battle wide x 3/4 in. thick
Implements Coins, trade bars, or trade goods plus
magic items that focus on utility
‘TRADE Goops
Relics Art objects plus magic items that Merchants commonly exchange trade goods with-
have religious origins or purposes
out using currency. The Trade Goods table shows
the value of commonly exchanged goods.

Trape Goops
Cost Goods
1CP 1b, of wheat
2CP 2b. of flour
or one chicken

SCP 1b. of salt
1SP 1b. of iron or1 sq. yd. of canvas

5SP 1b. of copper
or 1 sq. yd. of cotton cloth

1GP 1b. of ginger
or one goat
2GP 1b. of cinnamon or pepper, or one sheep
3GP 1b. of cloves or one pig

SGP 1b. ofsilver
or 1 sq. yd. of linen
10 GP 1 Ib. of silk or one cow

15GP 1 Ib. of saffron or one ox
50 GP 1 Ib. of gold

500 GP. 1 Ib. of platinum

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 213

GEMSTONES 100 GP Gemstones
Gemstones are smal ightweight, and easily se 1a10 Stone
cured compared to ther same value in coins. 1 Amnber (watery god to rich gold)
Ifa treasure hoard includes gemstones, you can
‘Amethyst (deep purple)
use the following tables to randomly determine the
kind of gemstones found, based on their value, You Chrysobery (yellow green to pale green)
can roll once and assume all the gems are the same oval (crimson)
orrell multiple times to create mixed collections.
Garnet (ed, brown green, or violet)

10 GP Gewsrones Jade (light green, deep green, or whit)
1di2_ Stone Jet (deep black)

11 _zurte (otted deep blue) Pear (lustrous white, yellow, oF pink)
2 Banded agate (striped brown, blue, white, or Spine (re, red brown, or deep green)
red)
10 Tourmaline (pale green, blue, brown, or re)
Blue quartz (pale be)

Eye agate (ccs of gray, white, brown, blue, 500 GP Gewstones

or green 145 Stone

Hematite (gry black) ‘Alexandrite (datk green)

Lapis lazuli (light and dark blue with yellow 2 ‘Aquamarine (gale blue green)
flecks) 3 Black peat (pure black)
Malachite (tiated light and dark green) Blue spinel (deep blue)
Moss agate (pink o yellow white with mossy 5 Peridot (ch olive green)
s1ay oF green markings)
6 Topaz (golden yellow)
9 Obsidian (back)
10 Rhodochroste (ight pink) 1,000 GP Gemstones

11 Tiger eye (brown with golden center) 1d8_ Stone

12 Turquoise (light
blue green) 1 Black opal (dark green with black mottling
and golden flecks)
50 GP Gemsrones 2 Blue sapphite medium blue)
1412. Stone 3 Emerald (deep bright green)
1. Bloodstone (dark ray with red ecks) 4 Fite opal (ery red)

Carnelian (orange tore brown) 5 ‘Opal (pale blue with green and golden
Chaleedony white) mottling)

Cheysoprase (green) ‘Star ruby (ruby wth white star-shaped center)

Citrine (pale yellow brown) Star sapphire (blue sapphice with white star
shaped center)
Jasper (sue, black, o brown)
Moonstone (white with paleblue glow)
a Yellow sapphire (ery yellow or yellow green)

Onyx (bands ofblack and white, or pure black
5,000 GP Gemstones
‘or white)
1d4_ Stone
Quartz (white, smoky ray, or yellow)
Black sapphire (lustrous back wth glowing.
Sardonyx (bands ofred and white)
highlights)
Star rose quartz (rosy stone with white star Diamond (blue white, canary, pink, brown, or
shaped center)
blue)
Zircon (pale blue green)
Jacinth (ery orange)
Ruby (lear red to deep crimson)

21g CHAPTER? | TaEASURE

Macic ITEMs two are combined, rll again foreach subsequent
potion, combinin g result. Unless the effects are
the
“Magi items are gleaned from the hoards of felled
immediately obvious, reveal them only when they
monsters or discovered in onglost vaults Such
become evident.
items grant capabiliti a character could
es rarely
have otherwise, or they complement their owner's Potion Misci
capabilities in wondrous ways
16100 Result
Macic Irem CaTEcorirs 01 Both potions
lose their effects, and the
Every magic item belongs toa category. The Magic mixture createsa magical explosion in a

Item Categories table ists the nine categories and Soot radius Sphere centered on itself.
Provides examples, Rules forthe categories appear Each creature in that area takes 410 Force
afer the table damage,

(02-08. Both potions lose ther effects, and the mic
Macic Irem Carecories

category Examples ture becomes an ingested potson of your

Armor
choice (see “Poison” in chapter 3)
41 Leather Armer, +1 Shield
Potions Potion of Healing
(09-15 Both potions lose their effects

16-25 One potion loses its effet.
Rings Ring of invsiity

Rods Immovable Rod
26-35 Both potions work, but with their merical
effects and durations halved. If potion
Scrolls Spal Seal has no numerical effect and no duration,
t

Staffs Sta
of Sting
ff instead loves its eect.

35-90 oth potions work normally
Wands Word
of Fireballs

‘Weapons +1 Ammunition, +1 Longsword 31-89 Both potions work, but the numerical
effects and duration f one potion are
‘Wondrous tems Bag of Holding, Boots of Evenkind
‘doubled. Ifnether potion has anything
to
Armor double inthis way, they work normaly.
‘An item in the Armor category is typically a mag> (00 Only one potion works, butts eects are
ical version of armor from the Players Hendbook permanent. Choose the simplest effect
to
Unless an armor's deseription notes otherwise, the ‘make permanent or the one that seems the
armor must be worn for its magic to function. most fun. For example, «Potion of Healing
Some sultsof magie armor specify the type ofar
might increase the drinker’ Hit Point max:
‘mor they are, suchas Chain Mail or Plate Armor. If
imurn by 244+ 2, or Potion of invisibility
ro typeiis specified, choose the type or determine it
right give the drinker the Invisible cond
randomly.
tion indefinitely. At your discretion,a ise,
Potions ‘Magic spel or similar magic might end this
‘Anitem in the Potion category might be a magical lasting effect.
brew that must be imbibed or an ail that must be
appliedtoa creature or an object. Atypical potion Rincs
consists of ounce ofliquid in a via. For its magic to function, an item inthe Ring cat
Using a Potion. Potions are consumable items gory must be worn ona finger or a similar digit
Drinking
a potion or administering t to another unless its description notes otherwise.
creature requires
a Bonus Action. Applying
an oil
Rovs
might take longer as specified in its description
(Once used, a potion takes effect immediately, and it [An item in the Rod category isa scepter usually
isused up, ‘made of metal, wood, of bone. Atypical rod weighs

“Mixing Potions. A character might drink one po- 20 5 pounds.
Unles its description notes otherwise, aod can
tion while still under the effects of anather or pour
several potions into a single container The strange bbe used as an Arcane Focus,

ingredients used in creating potions can result in
Soros
“unpredictable interactions.
Anitem in the Serol category
i rol of paper or
‘When a character mixes two potions together,
parchment, sometimes attached to wooden rods and
roll on the Potion Miscibility table. If more than
typically kept safe ina tube of ivory, jade, lather,

216

Macic Irems AWARoED By LeveL
Character Level Common Uncommon
(Tier of Play) tems Items tems thems ems
1-4 (er 1) 6 4 ° ° 7

5-10 ter 2) 0 0 1 ° 3

1-46 ter 3) 3 7 7 2 30

17-20 ter 4) ° ° 5 ” ° 2s

‘otal ry 28 2 ry n 1100

AWARDING Macic ITEMS level 1 to 4 might include fourteen items rather than
leven, in the expectation that three items wont
‘Awarding magic items is the purview ofthe DM.
be found
You can award a magic tem because the story calls
fori or the players would be especially pleased to Mactc Irem Tracker
have it. Ths section helps you to determine which ‘You can use the Magic Item Tracker sheet to track
‘magic tems end up inthe characters possession,
how many magic tems the characters have a-
‘quired. Each time the characters get a magie item,
Mactc Irems AWARDED ay LeveL
The Magic Items Awarded by Level table shows the puta check mark in one ofthe empty circles corre:
sponding tothe item's arity and the current level
‘numberof magic itemsa D&D party typically gains
range ofthe characters IPthe character gain a
during
a campaign, totaling
one hundred magic
‘magic item of a rarity that has no unchecked circles
items by level 20. The table shows how many items
atthe current level ange, check off an empty citele
ofeach rarity are meant tobe handed out during
from a lower tie. If all lower level ranges also have
each ofthe four tiers of play.
no circles let check off an empty circle from a
‘Artifacts are omitted from the table because they
higher level range
are most often used as plot devices in high-level a
‘ventures, and characters rarely have them for long Ranpom Macic Item RARITY
(either because the Artifacts are meant tobe de ‘When you decide that a treasure contains magic
stroyed or because the campaign is nearing its end). items, there are two ways to determine ther
Player Wish List. Encourage your players to keep those items. You can choose an appropriate rarity
‘a wish ist of magicitems they hope their charac- based on the items you've given out already (sing
{ers will find in the course ofthe campaign. IF you the Magic Item Tracker sheet to keep track) you
‘want to award a magic item but don't have a specific can roll onthe Magie tem Rarities table,
‘magic item in mind, you can pick an item ofthe ap- ‘Touse the table, ind the level ofthe characters in
propri
rarity from your
ate players wish list. the top row. Roll 14100, and read down that column
Overstocking
an Adventure. When creating or tofind your roll Then read across othe right col
‘modifying
an adventure, assume thatthe characters ‘uma to find the rarity of the tem,
‘wor't ind all the magic items you place init. An ad
venture usually can include a number of tems that’s Macic Ire Raniries
25 percent higher than the number in the Magic 1100
ro
Items Awarded by Level table (round up, For exam
Levels Levels Levels Levels item's
ple, an adventure designed to take characters from
we S10 1-16 7-20 Rarity

‘Ane Macic ITEMS NECESSARY? 1-54 01-30 ON = Common

‘The D&D game assumes that magic items appear 55-81 31-81 1234 = — Uncommon
sporadically and thatthe area boon unless an
92-00 8298 35-70 01-20 Rare
item bears 2 curse. Characters and monsters
are built to face each other without
the help of — 99-00 71-938 21-64 Very Rare

magicitems, which means that having a magic — = 94-00 65-00 Legendary
item makes a character more powerful or versa-
tile than a generic characte of the same level ActivatiNG A Macrc ITEM
[AS DM, you never have to wory about awarding
Ieusuall
takes a Magie y
ation to activate
a magie
‘magic items just so the characters can keep up
item, The item's user might also need to do some-
withthe campaigns threats. Magic items are truly ‘thing special. The descriptofeach
ion item category
prizes—desiable but not necessary
‘or individual item details how an item is activated,

|

‘A magic item may require the user
to use their
(Macic ITEMS FoR STARTING CHARACTERS
‘own spelicasting ability when casting a spel from
Ifyoue starting a campaign for characters above
the item, Ifthe user has more than one spellcasting
level 1, the Players Handbook offers sugges:
ability the user chooses which one to use with the
tions for haw many magic items such characters
item Ifthe user doesn't have a spelleasting ability,
should start wth and the rarity of those items. ther pelieasting ability modifiers +0 forthe item,
Consider these approaches to determining the
and the urer's Proficiency Bonus applies.
items each character receives:
DM Choice. Choose items foreach character us:
Cuarces
ing your own judgment. Some magic items have charges that must be ex-

Player Choice. Let the players choose whatever pended to activate their properties. The number
items they want, within the specified rarity. ‘of charges an item has remaining
is revealed when

Random Determination. Use te tables at the end the Identify spell is cast ont. A creature attuned to
an tem knows how many charges the item
has and
‘ofthis chapter to randomly determine starting
item Use the Arcana tables for Sorcerers, War how many it regains

locks, and Wiaards, Use the Armaments tables
“Tue Next Dawn”
for Sarbarians, Fighters, Paladins, nd Rangers.
Use the Implements tables for Bards, Monks, “Magic items often have charges or properties
that
land Rogues. Use the Relies tables for Clerics recharge atthe next dawn or some other specified
and Druids. Feel ree to vary the tables you use time. Ifsuch an item isona world or plane ofexis
to give each charactera mixofuseful tems and tence where the specified event doesnt occur, the
to match character themes, For example, fora DM determines when the item recharges
Fighter with the ElvtchKright subclass, you
‘might choose one item fom the Arcana tables Cursp Irems
and the rest ofthe characte’ items fom the ‘A magicitem’s description specifies whether i bears
Armaments tables curse. Most methods ofidentifying tems, includ-
ing the Identify spel. fail to reveal such
a curse.

Certain tems use the following rules for ther ‘Attunement to a cursed item can't he ended volun-
tarily unless the curse is broken frst, such as with a
activation
Remove Curse spell
Commanp Worp
‘command word is a word or short phrase that Macic IreM RESILIENCE
‘must be spoken or signed for an item to work: Spo- ‘A magicitem ist least as durable as a nonmagical
keen command words must be audible an fal to item of its kind. Most magie items, other than Po-
workin areas where all sound is suppressed, asin tions and Scrolls, ave Resistance to all damage.
the ares ofthe Silence spell An Artifact can be destroyed only in some special
way. Otherwise, its imperv damage. Learn-
toious
Consu mane reas
ing how to destroy an Artifact usually requires
Some items are consumed—used up, in other research or the completion
ofa quest.
wwords-when they are activated. A Potion of Healing
must be swallowed, for example, while the writing Crartinc Macrc Irems
vanishes froma serell when tis read. Once used,a
‘The Players Handbook contains rules on brewing
consumable item loses its magic.
Potionsof Healing and seribing Spell Seol To create
SPELLS Cast FROM ITEMS other magic items, follow the rules below. In these

Some magic items allow the user to cast a spell from rules, "Vou" refers tothe character
crafting the
magicitem.
the item, The spell is ast atthe lowest possible spell
and easter level, doesn't expend any ofthe user's
ARCANA PROFICIENCY
spell slots, and requires no components unless the
‘Tocrafta magicitem, you and any assistants must
item’s description notes otherwise. The spell uses
hhave proficiency inthe Arcana ski
its normal casting time, range, and duration, and
the user ofthe item must concentrate ifthe spel Tous
quires Concentration. Many items, such as Potions, ‘The Magic Item Tools table lists which tool isre-
bypass the casting ofa spell and confer the spells ‘quired to make
a magic item ofeach category. You
effects with ts usual duration, Certain items make ‘must use the required tool to make an item and
exceptions to these rules, changingthe casting time, have proficieney with that tool Any assistants must
duration, or other parts ofa spell also have proficiencywith it. For more information
fon the tools, seethe Player’ Handbook

Macic Irem SPECIAL FEATURES 1a20 Creator or intended User
You can ad distinctiveness toa magic item by 10 Elomental Water. Lustrous sh seals re
thinking about its backstory. Who made the item?
place leather or lath on ths item, and
Is anything unusual about its construction? Why
seashells nd worked coral (as hard as any
‘was it made, and how wast used originally?
What
metal) replace metal portions.
minor magical quirks set it apart from other items
ofits kind? Answering these questions can help m2 EE The items half the normal weight. It
turna generic magi item, such a a+{Longsword, 's adorned with symbols ofnature: leaves,
into amore flavorful discovery, ines, stars, andthe like,
Use the following tables to fill in details about 3 Fey. The iter is exquisitely crafted from the
a magic item's history, Some table entries make
finest materials and glows witha pale rad.
‘more sense forcertain items than for others, IF you
ance in moonlight, shedding Dim Light in a
roll something that doesnt make sense, rll agai,
Soot radius. Any metal inthe item is siver
choose a more appropriate etry, or use the rlled
etal as inspiration to make up your own special ‘or mithral eather than ran or steel

Feature. 14 Fiend. The item is made ofion or horn,
‘On the Magic Itemis Minor Property table and the and
any cloth or leather components are
Magic Item's Quirk table, "you" refers
to the items ‘afte from the hide of Fiends. Leeting
bearer faces orvilerunes are engraved on its sur
‘ace, Celestial id it epulsive,
Macic Item's CReAtor oR INTENDED User
Gant. The itm is larger than normal
1420. Creator or Intended User un and was crafted by Giants fr use by their
1 Aberration. The tem is ancient At glance, smaller alles.
Itseems to be covered with mucus 6
Gnome. The tem is crafted
1 appear ord:
2 Gelestial. The item i half the normal weight
nary and well used It could also incorporate
and inseribed with feathered wings, suns,
gears and mechanical components, even if
and stars. Fends find it repulsive
these arent essential tits function,
3 Devote
of Lolth.
es The itr shal
the nor a9 Human, The item was created during the
‘mal weight. tis inscribed with spiders and
heyday of fallen human kingdom, or tis
‘webs in honor of Lolth,
tied
to‘ human of legend. might hold
4 Dragon, This item incorporates precious ring in a forgotten language or symbols
metals and gems fom
a dragon's hoard wines significance is lost to the ages
It grows warm when within 120 feet ofa 20 Undead, The item incorporates symbols.
Dragon,
cof death, such as bones and sll, and it
5-6 Dwar: The item is durable and has Dwar might be crafted from parts ofcorpses It
ish runes worked int its design. It might feels cold othe touch
be associated wth a clan that would like
to
seeitretured to their ancestral halls, Macic Irew’s History

7 Elemental it.The item is half the normal ves History

\weight and feels hollow. f it's made of ab- 7 ‘Aran. This iter was created for
an an:
Fe, itis daphanous cient order ofspeleasters and bears the
8 Elemental Earth. This ter might be crafted orders symbol.
from stone. Any cath or leather elements 2 Bane. This item was crested to oppose
are studded with finely polished rock, creatures ofa particular type, such as
9 Elemental Fire. This item is warm tothe Aberrations of Dragons.
touch, and any metal parts are crafted 3 Hero. A great hero once wielded this item,
from black ron Flame imagery cover its “Anyone who knows the items history ex:
surface pects great deeds from the new ower,
4 ‘Ornament. The tem honors
a special event,
Inset gemstones, gold or platinum inlays,
and gold or silver filigree adorn its surface,

ArT OBJECTS 1410 Object
Idols ast ofsolid god, necklaces studded with pre- 5. a dragon with red
Gold comb shaped like
cious stones, paintings
of ancient kings, bejeweled fatnets as eyes

dishes~art objects include all these and more. 6 Bottle stopper cork embossed with gold leaf
Ifa treasure hoard inchides art objects, you can
and set with amethysts
‘use the following tables to randomly determine
‘what art objects are found, based on ther valu, 7. Detaled, fesized dragonbornskul cast in
Rollon a table as many times a there are art ob- eleetrum
Jeet in the treasure hoard. There ean be more than 8 iver and gold brooch
‘one ofa given art abject.
(Obsidian statuette with god itings and nly

25 GP Arr Onjects 10 Paint mask
gold wared
W410. Object
2,500 GP Arr Onjects
1 Siher ewer
1410 Object
‘Carved bone statuette
1 Fine gold chain set with aire opal
ole bracelet
2 Old masterpiece painting
Cloth-of gold vestments
3. Embroi dered
sk and velvet mantle set with
Black velvet mask stitched with siver thread
numerous moonstones
Copper chalice with silver fligree
4 Platinum bracelet set with an emerald
Pair of engraved bone dice
5 glove set wth
Embroid jewel chips
ered
Handheld miror set na painted wooden
6 Jeweled anklet
frame
7 Gold music box
9 Embroidered
sik handkerchief
8 Gold circle set with four aquamarines
10 Gold locket with painted portrait inside
° fe patch decorated with tiny blue sapphires
and moonstones
250 GP Arr Osjects:
140. Object 10 of small pink pearls
Anecklace string

1 Gold rng set with blaodstones
71500 GP Arr Osjects
2 Carved ivory statuette
WaI0 Object
3 Bejeweled gold bracelet
1 Jeweled gold crown
4 Silver neckiace with a gemstone pendant
Jeweled platinum ring
5 Bronze crown
Gold statuette set with ubies
6 Silk vestme nts
with gold embroidery
Gold cup set with emeralds
7. Well-made tapestry that is 10 fet
by 10 fet
Gold jewelry box with platinum filigree
8 Brass mug with ade nly
Set ofgold nesting dalls
8 Box of turquoi se
animal gurines
Jade game board wth gold playing pieces
YO Gold birdcage with electrum fiigree
Bejeweled ivory drinking horn with gold
Filigree
750 GP Art Onjecrs
Gilded royal coach o funeral barge
1410 Object
10 Ceremonial gold armor with black pears
1 Silver chalice set with moonstones

2. the lost
Bundle of sheet music representing
diges of famous composer
3 Carved wooden harp with ivory inlay and
zircon gems

4 Gold idl

215

metal, or wood. The most prevalent scroll i the Macic IrEw RULES
Spell Serola spell stored in written form. However, Rules fr identifying, attuning to, end using magic
some scroll ike the Srl of Protection, bear an i items appear inthe Player's Handbook. Additional
‘antation tht isn't a spell rules are presented below.
Using
a Scroll. Scrolls are consumable items, Un-
“Attunement Prerequisites, \fa magic item has @
leashing
the magic in a scroll requires
the user to class prerequisite, a ereature must be a member
read the scroll. When its magic has been invoked,
‘ofthat class to attune tothe item Ifa creature
the scroll cant be used again Its words fade, ort must bea spellsstert attune
to an em, the
crumbles into dust ‘creature qualifies fit can cast at least one spell
‘Any creature that can understand a writen lan Using its tats or features, not by using a magle
guage can read a scroll and attempt to activate it item or the like
unless its description notes otherwise Items Made for Specific Creatures. Magic tems
o be worn tend 9 magialyad-
that are meant
Starrs
Just themselves
tothe wearer However, you can
tems in the Stalf eategory vary widely in appear~
decide that a magic item doesn’t adjustits size to
ance: some are ofnearly equal diameter throughout
fitany wearer. For example,a particular armorer
and smooth, others are gnarled and twisted, some
right make tems usable ony by fll wh are
sre made of wood, and others are composed of pol-
Sized and shaped like dwarves,
hed metal or erystal. A staff weighs between2 and
Unusual Anatomy. Use your discretion to de-
7 pounds and serves well asa walking stick or cane.
cide whether a creature can wear an iter not
Unless its description notes otherwise, a stafF
‘made forts anatonny. A ng placed on = tentacle
can be used asa nonmagical Quarterstaff and an
might work, but ayoart witha snakelketalin-
‘Arcane Focus,
stead of lege can't wear magic boots
Waxps Paired items. You can allow exceptions to the
Anitem in the Wand category is typically 2 to 15 ‘ule that pated items must both be worn. For

inches lng and crafted of meta, bone, or wood. It ‘example, a character with ony one arm might be
is tipped with metal, crystal, stone, or some other ble to use a single Glove of Misi Snavng so
fong as the matching gloves on their person
material.
Unless its description notes otherwise, a wand can
be used as an Arcane Focus, Mactc Irem VALUES BY RARITY
Common magic items can often be bought ina
Wearons
town or city. Uncommon and Rare magic items are
A magic weapon is typically
a magical version of
usually Found only in ites, and rarer magie tems
8weapon from the Players Handbook, Some magic
might be sold only in wondrous locations, such as
‘weapons specify the typeof weapon they are in
the City of Brass or Sigil Ifyou allow characters to
their descriptions, such asa Longsword or Long
‘buy and sll magic temsin your campaign, rarity
bow: Ifo weapon typeis specified, you may choose
‘can help you set prices for those items. Gold Piece
the type or determine it randomly.
values are provided inthe Magic Item Rarities and
“Ammunition. If magic weapon has the Ammuni-
‘Values table, thougha seller might ask for a service
tion property, ammunition fired from it is consid
rather than coin as payment.
ered magical for the purpose ofany rue that cares
magic item incorporates an item that has a
‘whether
2 weapon is magical
or not
purchase cost in the Players Handbook (such asa

Wowprous Irems ‘weapon
or a suit of armor), add that item’ ost to
the magic item's value. For example, + Armor (Pate
Wondrous tems include wearable tems such as
Armor) has a value of 5,500 GP, which isthe sum of
boots, belts, capes, amulets, brooches, and circlets.
4 Rare magic item’ value (4,000 GP) and the cost of
Bags, carpets figurines, horns, musical instruments,
and more als fall nt this eategory.
Plate Armor (1,500 GP).

Macic Irem Rarity Macic Item Rarities AND VALUES

Every magic item hasa rarity, which providesa Rarity Value® Rarity Value
rough measure of an item's power relative to other Common 100GP._Very Rare 40,000GP
‘magic tems. The rarities are shown in the Magic
Uncommon 400GP Legendary 200,000
GP
Item Rarities and Vales table
ave 4000GP Artifact Priceless
‘Common magic items, such as a Potion of Healing,
are the most plentiful. Artifacts, such as the Wand of “Hale the le ora consumable te than a pl se
(Oreus, are prceles, unique and dificult to acquire. “hevue
fa Spl Soa cole harcore ll
(es apected nthe oe Hanabot

CHAPTER?
| TREASURE 217

MAGIC ITEM TRACKER

LEVELS 1-4
RARITIES ITEMS
6 COMMON OCO0000

4UNCOMMON OOOO

1 RARE 1e)

LEVELS 5-10
RARITIES”

10 COMMON

lelelelerlele)
i7uNcomMoN OOOOOO
lelelelese)
6 RARE leleleleleye)

TVERY RARE =O

LEVELS 11-16
RARITIES ITEMS

3 COMMON 1oxere)
7uNcoMMON QOQOOOOO

OOC00O
11 RARE
OO0O0O
7VERYRARE OQOOOO0O0O0

2LEGENDARY OO

LEVELS 17-20 e
5 RARE OO00CO0O0

OOCO00O
TIVERY RARE GGG QQ

OOC00O0
9 LEGENDARY
lexete)

Macic Item Toots ‘Work per Day. For each day ofcrafting, you must

Item Category Required Too! ‘work for 8 hous. Ifan item requires multiple days,
those days needn't be consecutive,
Armor Leatherworke's Tool, Smith's
Assistants. Characters
can combine ther efforts
Tools, or Weaver
Tools depend:
's
to shorten the crafting time. Divide the time needed
Ingon the kind oF armor a: noted
tocreate an tem by the number of characters work:
inthe tools descriptions
Potion
ing on it. Normally, only one other character can
Alchemists Supplies or assist you, but the DM might allow more assistants,
Herbalism kit Raw Materials.The cost inthe table represents
the raw materials needed to makea magie tem, The
Ring Jeweler’ Tools
DM determines whether appropriate
raw materials
Rod Woodearver's Tools
Scroll Calligrpher's Supplies
are available. Ina city, there i 75 percent chance
thatthe materials are available, and in any other
staf Woodearve's Tools settlement, that chance is 25 percent. If materials

Wand arent availabe, you must wait at least
7 days before
Woodearver's Tools
Weapon Leatherworker's Tools, Smith's checking on the availability again,
Ifa magic item incorporates an item that has
a
Tools, or Woodearver's Tools de purchase cost (uch as'a weapon or
a suit of armor),
pending onthe kind of weapon as you must aso pay that entire cost or raft that item
noted in the tools’ descriptions using the rules in the Player's Handbook. For exam
Wondrous Item Tinker’ Tools a the tool requted ple, to make +f Armor (Plate Armor), you must pay
5,500 GP
or pay 2,000 GP and erat the armor.
to-make the nonmagial tem an
which the magic item s based
Macic Item Crarrinc Time Ano Cost

Spents tem Rarity Time! Cost®
fa magic item allows its user to cast any spells Common S days 50.GP
from i, you must have all those spells prepared ev
Uncommon 10 days 200.GP
‘ery day you spend crafting the item,
Rare 50 days 2000 cP.
Tite ND Cost Very Rare 125 days 20,000 cP
Craftinga magic item takes an amount of time and
Legendary -250days_——100,000.GP
‘money based on the items rarity as shown in the
‘Magie tem Crafting Time and Cost table,
Spel sel whore cating
Henao

vas History

5 Prophecy. The item features in a prophecy: ‘Songeraft. Whenever tis item is struck or
its bearer is destined to playa key role in is used to strkea fo, you hear a fragment
future events ‘ofan ancient song,
Religious. This item was used in religious ws ‘Strange Material. The item was created
‘ceremonies dedicated toa particular deity. from a material that is bizare given its pur
Ithas religious symbols worked into it. pose. Its durability is unaffected
Sinister. This item is linked to a deed of 16 Temperate. You are unharmed by tempera:
‘great el, suchas a massacre or an assas: tur
of degrees
es Fahrenor
heit
lower, and
sination tight have a name or be closely 100 degrees Fahrenheit or higher.
associated with a villain who used I w Unbreakable. The item can’ be broken
‘Symbol of Power. This tem was once used Special means must be used to destroy i
23s part
of royal regalia or asa badge ofhigh
‘War Leader. You can take2 Magle action to
office.
‘cause your voice or signal o carry cleat

for up to 600 fet unti he end of your next
Macic Item's Minor Proverty
1420 Minor Property
Waterborne. This tem floats on water
ny Beacon. You can take a Bonus Aetion to and other liquids. You have Advantage on
to shed Bright Lightin a 10:
‘cause the tem Strength (Athletics) checks to swim,
foot radius and Dim Light for an additional
» Roll twice, reroling any additional 20s
feet, oro extinguish the lg.
‘Compass. You can takea Magic action to Macic Irem's Quirk
learn which way is magnetic north, Nothing
ras Quire
happens if this propery is used in aloca-
1 Blsful. You feel fortunate and optimistic
tion that has no magnetic north,
about what the future holds, Buttrfies and
Dever While underground, you always
‘other harmless creatures might Flic in the
knw the item's depth below the surface
item's presence
and the direction tothe nearest staircase,
Confident. The item helps you fee!
ramp, or other path lading upward
selFassured,
56 Guardian. The iter warns you, granting &
CCovetous. You become obsessed with mate-
{+2 bonus to your Initiative ells fyou don't
Hal wealth,
have te incapacitated condition.
Fragile. The item crumbles, rays, chips,
at) Harmonious. Attuniog
to this iter takes
orcracs slighty when wielded, wor, or
only minute
activate, This qui has no effet on its
Key. The tem is used to unlock
a container,
properties,
chamber, vault, or door
Loud. The ites makes 2 loud noise—such
10 Secret Message. A messages hidden
as a clanga shout, ora resonating gong—
somewhere onthe ter, ftmightbe visible
when used
only at a certain time, under the ight fone
Metamorphic. The item periodicalyaers
phase ofthe moon, orn a specif location
its appearance insight ways. You have no
Ww Sentinel. The DM choosesa kind
of eres
control over these minor alterations, which
tre, such as mind fayersor tells. This
hhave no effect on the tem’ use
item glows faintly when such creatures are
Painful. You experience a harmless fash of
within 120 fet of
pain when using the item,

Repusive. You fel a sense of distaste when
in contact with the item and continue to ex
petience discomfort while bearing it

233,

ARTIFACTS Minor BENEFICIAL PROPERTIES

An Artifact is a unique, singularly powerful magic 1d100 Property
item with its own origin and history. It could have 01-20 While attuned to the Artifact, you gain pro&
been created in the midst of
a crisis that threatened ciency in one skill of the DM's choice.
a kingdom, a world, or the entire multiverse, and
1 21-30 While attuned to the Artifact, you have
carry the weight of that pivotal moment in history.
Immunity to the Poisoned condition.
‘Some Artifacts appear when they are needed
most. For others, the reverse is true; when these 31-40 While attuned to the Artifact, you have
Artifacts are discovered, the world trembles at the Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened
ramifications ofthe find, In either case, introducing conditions.
an Artifact into a campaign requires forethought. 41-50 While attuned to the Artifact, you have Re-
It could be an item that opposing sides are hoping
sistance to one damage type of the DM's
to claim, or it might be something the adventurers
choice.
need to overcome their greatest challenge.
Characters don't typically find Artifacts in the 51-60 While attuned to the Artifact, you can cast

normal course of adventuring. In fact, Artifacts ip (chosen by the DM) from it.
appear only when you want them to, for they are as 61-70 While attuned to the Artifact, you can cast
much plot devices as magic items. Tracking down ‘one level 1 spell (chosen by the DM) from
and recovering an Artifact is often the main goal of it, After you cast the spell, roll 146. On a
an adventure. Characters must chase down rumors,
roll of 1-5, you can't cast it again in this way
undergo significant trials, and venture into danger-
until the next dawn,
ous, half-forgotten places to find the Artifact they
seek. Alternatively, a major villain might already 7-80 ‘As 61-70 above, except the spell is level 2.

have the Artifact. Ob ig and destroying the Ar- 81-90 As 61-70 above, except the spell is level 3.
tifact could be the only way to ensure that its power 91-00 While attuned to the Artifact, you gain a +7
can't be used for evil.
bonus to Armor Class.
ARTIFACT PROPERTIES
In addition to its defined properties, an Artifact
Major BENEFICIAL PROPERTIES

might have other properties that are either benefi- 14100, Property
cial or detrimental. You can choose such properties 01-20 While attuned to the Artifact, one of your
from the tables in this section or determine them ability scores (DM's choice) increases by 2,
randomly. You can also invent new beneficial and
toa maximum of 24.
detrimental properties. These properties typically
21-30 While attuned to the Artifact, you regain
change each time an Artifact appears in the world.
An Artifact can have as many as four minor ben- 1d6 Hit Points at the start of each of your
ficial properties and two major beneficial proper- turns if you have at least 1 Hit Point.
ties. It can have.as many as four minor detrimental 31-40 When you hit with an attack roll while at-
properties and two major detrimental properties. tuned to the Artifact, the target takes an
extra 1d6 Force damage.

41-50 While you're attuned to the Artifact, your
Speed increases by 10 feet.

51-60 While attuned to the Artifact, you can cast
one level 4 spell (chosen by the DM) from
it, After you cast the spell, roll 146. On a
roll of 1-5, you can’t cast it again in this way
until the next dawn.
61-70 ‘As 51-60 above, except the spell is level 5.
71-80 ‘As 51-60 above, except the spell is level 6.
81-90 ‘As 51-60 above, except the spell is level 7.

91-00 While attuned to the Artifact, you have Im=
munity to the Blinded, Deafened, Petrified,
and Stunned conditions.

224 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

MINOR DETRIMENTAL PROPERTIES Major DETRIMENTAL PROPERTIES
1d100 Property 1d100 Property
01-08 While attuned to the Artifact, you have 01-09 You can't attune to other magic items
Disadvantage
on any
ability che
or saving
ck while you're attuned to the Artifact. When
throw that uses Strength or Constitution. you become attuned to the Artifact, your
09-16 While attuned to the Artifact, you have Attunement to other magic items ends
Disadvantage on Intelligence, Wisdom, and immediately.
Charisma saving throws. 10-18 When you become attuned to the Artifact,
17-24 While attuned to the Artifact, you have Vul- a random one of your ability scores is re-
nerability to Poison damage. duced by 2, to a minimum of 3. A Greater
25-32 While attuned to the Artifact, you have the Restoration spell restores the ability.
Blinded condition when you're more than 19-27 ‘When you become attuned to the Artifact,
10 feet away from it. you take 8410 Psychic damage,
33-40 While attuned to the Artifact, you have the 28-36 The first time you become attuned to the
Deafened condition when you're more than Artifact, it gives you a quest determined by
10 feet away from it. the DM. You can’t use any ofthe Artifact's
While attuned to the Artifact, you lose all properties until you complete the quest.
sense of smell, 37-45 Each time you become attuned to the Arti-
49-66 While you're attuned to the Artifact, your fact, there is a 10 percent chance that you

appearance changes as the DM decides. attract the attention ofa god who sends an

While attuned to the Artifact, you emit a avatar to wrest the Artifact from you. The
avatar has the same alignment as its creator
sour stench noticeable from up to 10 feet
and uses the Empyrean stat block. Once it
away.
obtains the Artifact, the avatar vanishes.
Whenever you touch a nonmagical gem
46-54 Each time you become attuned to the Arti-
or an art object while attuned to this Ar
fact, you must succeed on a DC 10 Consti-
fact, the value of the gem or art object is
tution saving throw or die from the shock.
reduced by half. This affects a particular
Ifyou die, you're instantly transformed into
object only once.
a Wight under the DIM’s control that must
While you're attuned to the Artifact, all Holy
protect the Artifact.
Water within 10 feet ofyou is destroyed.
55-63 The Artifact dilutes potions within 10 feet of
While you're attuned to the Artifact, non-
itself, rendering them nonmagical.
magical flames are extinguished within 30
64-72 ‘The Artifact erases scrolls within 10 feet of
feet of you.
itself, rendering them nonmagical.
While you're attuned to the Artifact, other
73-81 While you're attuned to the Artifact, crea-
creatures can't take Short or Long Rests
tures ofa particular type other than Hu-
while within 300 feet of you.
manoid (chosen by the DM) are always
While attuned to the Artifact, you kill any
Hostile toward you.
nonmagical vegetation you touch that isn’t
acreature.
82-90 While attuned to the Artifact, you have
Vulnerability to all damage.
While you're attuned to the Artifact, Beasts
within 30 feet ofyou that have a Challenge
91-96 The Artifact imprisons a Death Slaad. Each
time you become attuned to the Artifact,
Rating of 6 or lower are Hostile toward you.
the slaad has a 10 percent chance ofescap-
ing, whereupon it appears in an unoccu-
pied space as close to you as possible and
attacks you.
97-00 While attuned to the Artifact, you can't
spend Hit Point Dice or regain Hit Points.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 225

SENTIENT Macic ITEMS SENTIENT ITEM’s COMMUNICATION

Some magic items have sentience and personality. 1410 Communication
Such an item might be possessed, haunted by the 1-6 The item communicates by transmit-
spirit ofa previous owner, or self-aware thanks to ting emotion to the creature carrying or
the magic used to create it. A sentient item might be
wielding it.
a cherished ally to its wielder or a continual thorn
7-9 The item speaks one or more languages.
in the side.
Most sentient items are weapons, but other kinds 10 The item speaks one or more languages. In
ofitems can manifest sentience. Single-use items addition, the item can communicate tele-
such as potions and scrolls are never sentient. pathically with any creature that carries or
‘The DM controls sentient magic items and their wields it.
activated properties. A bearer who maintains a
good relationship with the item can access those
SENTIENT ITEM’s SENSES
properties. If the relationship is strained, a conflict
1d4 Senses
can ensue (see “Conflict” below).
1 Hearing and standard vision out to 30 feet
SENTIENT Macic Irem Traits
2 Hearing and standard vision out to 60 feet
‘When you make a sentient magic item, you create
the item’s persona much as you would create an 3 Hearing and standard vision out
o 120 feet
NPC (as described in the “Nonplayer Characters” 4° Hearing and Darkvision out to 120 feet
section of chapter 3), with these exceptions.
Abilities. A sentient magic item has Intelligence, SENTIENT ITEM’s SPECIAL PURPOSE
Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Choose the item's
1d10_ Special Purpose
abilities, or determine them randomly as follows:
roll 4d6 for each one, dropping the lowest roll and 1 Aligned.
The item seeks to defeat or destroy
totaling the rest. those ofa diametrically opposed alignment.
Alignment. A sentient magiciitem has an align- Such an item is never Neutral.
ment. Its creator or nature might suggest an align-
2 Bane. The item seeks to thwart or destroy
ment. Otherwise, pick an alignment or roll on the
creatures of a particular type, such as Con-
Sentient Item's Alignment table.
structs, Fiends, or Undead.
Communication. A sentient item communicates
by sharing its emotions, broadcasting its thoughts 3 Creator Seeker. The item seeks its creator
telepathically, or speaking aloud. You can choose and wants to understand why it was created.
how it communicates or roll on the Sentient Item's 4 Destiny Seeker. The item believes it and its
Communication table. bearer have key roles to play in future events.
Senses. A sentient item can perceive its surround-
ings out to a limited range. You can choose its 5 Destroyer. The item craves destru mand
senses or roll on the Sentient Item’s Senses table, goads its user
to fight arbitrarily.
Special Purpose. You can give a sentient item an 6 Glory Seeker. The item seeks renown as the
objective it pursues, perhaps to the exclusion ofall greatest magic item in the world by winning
else. As long as the wielder’s use of the item aligns fame or notoriety for its user.
with that special purpose, the item remains coop-
erative, Deviating from this course might cause
7 Lore Seeker. The item craves knowledge or

conflict between the wielder and the item (see “Con- is determined to solve a mystery, learn a se-

flict” below). You can pick a special purpose or roll ‘ret, or unravel a cryptic prophecy.
on the Sentient Item's Special Purpose table. 8 Protector. The item seeks to defend a par-
ticular kind of creature, such as elves or
SENTIENT ITEM’S ALIGNMENT
werewolves.
14100. Alignment 14100 Alignment
9 Soulmate Seeker. The item seeks another
01-15 LawfulGood 74-85 Chaotic Neutral sentient magic item, perhaps one that is
16-35 NeutralGood 86-89 Lawful Evil similar to itself.

36-50 ChaoticGood 90-96 Neutral Evil 10 Templar. The item seeks to defend the ser.
51-63 Lawful Neutral 97-00 Chaotic Evil vants and interests ofa particular deity.

64-73 Neutral

226 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Conriict
When the bearer of a sentient item acts in a manner ADAMANTINE WEAPON
opposed to the item's alignment or purpose, conflict, Weapon (Any Ammunition or Melee Weapon),
can arise. When such a conflict occurs, the item's
Uncommon
bearer makes a Charisma saving throw (DC 12 plus
This weapon or piece of ammunition is made of ada-
the item's Charisma modifier). On a failed save, the
mantine, one of the hardest substances in existence.
item makes one or more ofthe following demands:
Whenever this weapon or piece of ammunition hits
Chase My Dreams. The item demands that its an object, the hit is a Critical Hit.
bearer pursue the item’s goals to the exclusion of
all other goals.
Get Rid of It. The item demands that its bearer dis- ALCHEMY JUG
pose of anything the item finds repugnant. Wondrous Item, Uncommon
It’s Time for a Change. The item demands to be
This ceramic jug appears to be able to hold a gal-
given to someone else.
Jon of liquid and weighs 12 pounds whether full or
Keep Me Close. The item insists on being carried or
empty. The jug sloshes when it is shaken, even if the
worn at all times.
jug is empty.

If its bearer refuses to comply with the item’s de- You can take a Magic action and name one liquid
mands, the item can do any of the following: from the Alchemy
Jug Liquids table to cause the jug
to produce the chosen liquid. Afterward, you can
~ Make it impossible for its bearer to attune to it
uncork the jug
as a Utilize action and pour that liq-
Suppress one or more ofits activated properties.
uid out, up to 2 gallons per minute. The maximum
Attempt to take control of its bearer, whereupon
amount of liquid the jug can produce depends on
the bearer makes a Charisma saving throw (DC
the liquid you named.
12 plus the item's Charisma modifier). On a failed
save, the bearer has the Charmed condition for
Id12 hours. While Charmed in this way, the
Avenemy Jue
bearer must try to follow the item's commands.
If the bearer takes damage, it repeats the save,
ending the effect on a success. Whether or not the
attempt to control its bearer succeeds, the item
can’t use this power again until the next dawn,

Macic Irems A~Z
Magic items are presented in alphabetical order.
Ifa magic item description capitalizes a creature's
name and presents it in bold type, that’s a visual cue
pointing you to the creature's stat block. Unless the
text states otherwise, the stat block is in the Mon-
ster Manual. How to read and use a stat block is ex-
plained in the Monster Manual and to a lesser degree
in the Player’s Handbook.

ADAMANTINE ARMOR
Armor (Any Medium or Heavy, Except ide Armor),
Uncommon

This suit of armor is reinforced with adamantine,
one of the hardest substances in existence. While
you're wearing it, any Critical Hit against you be-
comes a normal hit.

Aoamanrine Anson

(Breasrocare)

CHAP
7 | TE
TREASU
R RE

Once the jug starts producing a liquid, it can't
produce a different one, or more of one that has AMMUNITION, +1, +2, oR +3
reached its maximum, until the next dawn.
Weapon (Any Ammunition), Uncommon (1), Rare (+2),
or Very Rare (+3)
AtcHemy
Juc Liguips
You have a bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
Max. Max. made with this piece of magic ammunition. The bo-
Liquid Amount Liquid ‘Amount
nus is determined by the rarity of the ammunition.
Bounces Oil T quart Once it hits a target, the ammunition is no longer
Basic Poison 4 ounces Vinegar 2 gallons magical.

Beer 4 gallons Water, fresh 8 gallons This ammunition is typically found or sold in
quantities of ten or twenty pieces. Ten pieces of this,
Honey T gallon Water, salt 12 gallons ammunition are equivalent in value to a potion of
Mayonnaise 2gallons Wine 1 gallon the same rarity.

AMMUNITION OF SLAYING
Weapon (Any Ammunition), Very Rare

‘This magic ammunition is meant to slay creatures
of
a particular type, which the DM chooses or de-
termines randomly by rolling on the table below. If
a creature ofthat type takes damage from the am-
munition, the creature makes a DC 17 Constitution
saving throw, taking an extra 6d10 Force damage
Ammunition oF ona failed save or half
as much extra damage on a
Staving (Annow) successful one,
After dealing its extra damage to a creature, the
ammunition becomes nonmagical.

1d100 Creature Type 14100 Creature Type
01-10 Aberrations 51-60 Fey

11-15 Beasts 61-70 Fiends

16-20 Celestials 7-75. Giants

21-25 Constructs 76-80 Monstrosities

26-35. Dragons 81-85 Oozes

36-45 Elemental 86-90 Plants

46-50 Humani 91-00 Undead

AMULET OF HEALTH
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)

‘Your Constitution is 19 while you wear this amulet.
Ithas no effect on you if your Constitution is 19 or
higher without it.

AMULET OF PROOF AGAINST DETECTION
AND LOCATION
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)

While wearing this amulet, you can’t be targeted
by Divination spells or perceived through magical
serying sensors unless you allow it.
Amucer or Paoor acainsr
Derecrion ano Location

228 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

AMULET OF THE PLANES ANIMATED SHIELD
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
While wearing this amulet, you can take a Magic While holding this Shield, you can take a Bonus
action to name a location that you are familiar with Action to cause it to animate. The Shield leaps into
on another plane ofexistence. Then make a DC 15 the air and hovers in your space to protect you as if
Intelligence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you were wielding it, leaving your hands free. The
you cast Plane Shift. On a failed check, you and each Shield remains animate for1 minute, until you take
creature and object within 15 feet of you travel to a Bonus Action to end this effect, or until you die or
a random destination determined by rolling 14100 have the Incapacitated condition, at which point the
and consulting the following table. Shield falls to the ground or into your hand if you

1d100 Destination have one free.

01-60 Random location on the plane you named
61-70 Random location on an Inner Plane deter- APPARATUS OF KWALISH
mined by rolling 146: on a 1, the Plane of Wondrous Item, Legendary
Air; on 2, the Plane ofEarth; on a 3, the This item first appears to be a sealed iron barrel
Plane of Fire; on a4, the Plane of Water; on weighing 500 pounds. The barrel has a hidden
25, the Feywild; on a 6, the Shadowfell catch, which can be found with a successful DC 20
Intelligence (Investigation) check. Releasing the
71-80 Random location on an Outer Plane deter-
catch unlocks a hatch at one end of the barrel, al-
mined by rolling 148: on a1, Arborea; on a
lowing two Medium or smaller creatures to crawl
2, Arcadia; on a 3, the Beastlands; on a 4,
inside. Ten levers are set in a row at the far end,
Bytopia; on a 5, Elysium; on a 6, Mechanus;
each ina neutral position, able to move up or down.
on a7, Mount Celestia; on an 8, Ysgard When certain levers are used, the apparatus trans-
81-90 Random location on an Outer Plane deter- forms to resemble a giant lobster.
mined by rolling 148: on a 1, the Abyss; on ‘The Apparatus of Kwalish is a Large object with the
a2, Acheron; on a 3, Carceri; on a 4, Ge- following statistics: AC 20; HP 200; Speed 30 ft,
Swim 30 ft. (or
0 ft. for both if the legs aren’t ex-
henna; on a 5, Hades; on a 6, Limbo; ona 7,
tended); Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage.
the Nine Hells; on an 8, Pandemonium
To be used as a vehicle, the apparatus requires
91-00 Random location on the Astral Plane one pilot. While the apparatus's hatch is closed,

?
the compartment is airtight and watertight. The
compartment holds enough air for 10 hours of

Avpanarus oF

Kwauisn
Amucer or re

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 229

Aawon oF Resistance

breathing, divided by the number of breathing crea-
tures inside.
‘The apparatus floats on water. It can also go un-
derwater to a depth of 900 feet. Below that, the
vehicle takes 246 Bludgeoning damage each minute
from pressure.
Acreature in the compartment can take a Utilize
action to move as many as two ofthe apparatus's
levers up or down. After each use, a lever goes back
to its neutral position. Each lever, from left to right,
functions as shown in the Apparatus of Kwalish
Levers table,
Invuuneaaaiiry

Armor, #1, +2, or +3
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rare (+), Very
Rare (+2), or Legendary (+3)

You have a bonus to Armor Class while we ing this
armor. The bonus is determined by its rarity.

ARMOR OF GLEAMING
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Common

This armor never gets dirty.

ARMOR OF INVULNERABILITY
Armor (Plate Armor), Legendary (Requires Attunement)

‘You have Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and
Slashing damage while you wear this armor.

Apparatus OF KWALISH LEVERS

Lever Up Down

1 Legs extend, allowing the apparatus to walk and Legs retract, reducing the apparatus’s Speed and
swim. ‘Swim Speed to 0 and making it unable to benefit
from bonuses to speed.

Forward window shutter opens. Forward window shutter closes.
Side window shutters open (two per side). Side window shutters close (two per side).
Two claws extend from the front side of the The claws retract,
apparatus.

Each extended claw makes the following melee at- Each extended claw makes the following melee
tack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (2d6) Bludgeoning attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft. Hit: The target has the
damage. Grappled condition (escape DC 15).
The apparatus walks or swims forward provided its The apparatus walks or swims backward provided
legs are extended. its legs are extended,
The apparatus turns 90 degrees counterclockwise The apparatus turns 90 degrees clockwise provided
provided its legs are extended. its legs are extended,
Eyelike fixtures emit Bright Light in a 30-foot radius The light turns off.
and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet.

The apparatus sinks up to 20 feet ifit's in liquid. The apparatus rises up to 20 feet ifit's in liquid.
10 The rear hatch unseals and opens. The rear hatch closes and seals,

230 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Axe or me

Dwaaviss Lonos

‘Metal Shell. You can take a Magic action to give
yourself Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and (Pare Aamon)

Slashing damage for 10 minutes or until you are
no longer wearing the armor. Once this property is
used, it can’t be used again until the next dawn.

ARMOR OF RESISTANCE
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rare (Requires
Attunement)

You have Resistance to one type of damage while
you wear this armor. The DM chooses the type or
determines it randomly by rolling on the following ARROW-CATCHING SHIELD
table. Armor (Shield), Rare (Requires Attunement)

1410 Damage Type 1d10 Damage Type You gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class against ranged
attack rolls while you wield this Shield. This bonus
1 Acid 6 Necrotic
is in addition to the Shield’s normal bonus to AC.
2 Cold z Poison Whenever an attacker makes a ranged attack roll
3 Fire 8B Psychic against a target within 5 feet of you, you can take a
Reaction to become the target of the attack instead.
4 9 Radiant

5 10 Thunder
AXE OF THE DwarvisH Lorps
Weapon (Battleaxe), Artifact (Requires Attunement)
ARMOR OF VULNERABILITY A young dwarf prince set out to forge a weapon
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rare (Requires
that would be regarded as a symbol of unity among
Attunement)
his people. Venturing deep under the mountains,
While wearing this armor, you have Resistance to deeper than any dwarf had ever delved, the prince
one of the following damage types: Bludgeoning, came to the blazing heart of a great volcano. With
Piercing, or Slashing. The DM chooses the type or the aid of Moradin, a god of creation, he first
determines it randomly. crafted four mighty tools: the Starmetal Pick, the
Curse. This armor is cursed, a fact that is revealed Earthheart Forge, the Anvil of Songs, and the Shap-
only when the Identify spell is cast on the armor or ing Hammer. With these tools, he forged the Axe of
you attune to it. Attuning to the armor curses you the Dwarvish Lords.
until you are targeted by a Remove Curse spell or ‘Armed with the Artifact, the prince brought
similar magic; removing the armor fails to end the peace to the dwarf clans, ending grudges and an-
curse. While cursed, you have Vulnerability to two ‘swering slights. The clans became allies, and they
of the three damage types associated with the ar- threw back their enemies and enjoyed an era of
mor (not the one to which it grants Resistance). prosperity. This young dwarf is remembered as

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 231

the First King. When he became old, he passed the
weapon, which had become his badge of office, to
his heir. The rightful inheritors passed the axe on
for many generations.
Later, in an era marked by treachery and wicked-
ness, the axe was lost in a bloody civil war fomented
by greed for its power and the status it bestowed.
Centuries later, the dwarves still search for the axe,
and many adventurers have made careers of chas-
ing after rumors and plundering old vaults to find it.
Magic Weapon. The Axe of the Dwarvish Lords is a
magic weapon that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls
and damage rolls made with it.
When you attack a creature with the axe and roll Baoe Yaca’s
2.20 on the d20 for the attack roll, the axe deals an Dancinc Broom

extra 20 Slashing damage,
‘The axe has the Thrown property with a normal
range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. When
you hit with a ranged attack using this weapon, it
deals an extra 1d8 Force damage, or an extra 248
Force damage if the target is a creature of the Giant
type. Immediately after hitting or missing, the
‘weapon flies back to your hand. Travel the Depths. You can take a Magic action to
Blessings of Moradin. While attuned to the axe, touch the axe to a fixed piece of dwarven stonework
you gain the following benefits: and cast Teleport from the axe. If your intended des-
tination is underground, there is no chance of a mis-
Darkvision. You gain Darkvision a range of hap or arriving somewhere unexpected, You can't
60 feet. If you already have Darkv: On, its range use this property again until 3 days have passed.
increases by 60 feet.
Destroying the Axe. The only way to destroy the
Fortitude of Stone. Your Constitution increases by
axe is to melt it down in the Earthheart Forge,
2, to amaximum of 20.
where it was created. It must remain in the burning
Gifts of the Creator. You have proficiency with
forge for 50 years before it finally succumbs to the
Brewer's Supplies, Mason's Tools, and Smith's
fire and is consumed.
Tools.
One with the Forge. You have Immunity to Poison
damage and Resistance to Fire damage.
Basa Yaoa's DANCING BROOM
Sunder. When you hit an object with the axe, the
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
object takes the maximum amount of damage
possible. The archfey Baba Yaga crafted many of these
magic brooms. No two appear exactly alike. While
Conjure Earth Elemental. While holding the axe, holding the broom, you can take a Magic action to
you can take a Magic action to summon an Earth
transform it into an Animated Broom under your
Elemental. It appears in an unoccupied space you control. The broom then moves into an unoccupied
choose within 30 feet of yourself, understands your space as close to you as possible. The broom acts
languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count and
immediately after you on your Initiative count. The remains animate until you take a Bonus Action and
elemental disappears after 24 hours, when it dies, or use a command word to renderit inanimate.
when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. You can't use On your turn, you can mentally command the an-
this property again until the next dawn, imated broomif it is within 30 feet of you and you
Random Properties. The axe has the following ran- don't have the Incapacitated condition (no action
dom properties (see “Artifacts” in this chapter): required). You decide what action the broom takes

+ 2 minor beneficial properties and where it moves during its next turn, or you can
+ Lmajor beneficial property issue it a general command, such as to attack your
+ 2minor detrimental properties enemies or guard a location.
If the broom is reduced to Hit Points, it shatters
and is destroyed. If the broom reverts to its inani-
mate form before losing all its Hit Points, it regains
all of them.

232 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

1d100 Effect
Bac OF BEANS
51-60 1d4 + 4 bright-pink toads crawl forth.
Wondrous Item, Rare
; Whenever a toad is touched, it transforms
This heavy cloth bag contains 3d4 dry beans when intora Large oraralien menstereeine
found. The bag weighs halfa pound regardless of Freee UR iea eae Hee
how many beans it contains and becomes a non- oaEa PAPEL THe orca
magical item whenit no longer contains any beans.
Trou duayp one or more feans out of the bag,
ba NS ee
remains for 1 minute, then disappears in a

they explode in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on puff offbright-pink smoke,
them. All the dumped
p beans are destroyed
in the ex- 61-70 Ahungry
8 Bulette burrows up and attacks.
plosion, and each creature in the Sphere, including 71-80 A fruit tree grows. It has 1d10 + 20 fruit,
you, makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking ds of which act as randomly determined

Rises oraeeecona Siletoaye ena
as meh potions. The tree vanishes after 1 hour.
Ifyou remove a bean from the bag, plant it in dirt chad ful rere ralnlog ety Tnabic
or sand, and then water it, the bean disappears as it for 30:days,
produces an effect 1 minute later from the 8 ground 81-90 Anest of 1d4 + 3 rainbow-colored eges
88
where it was planted. The DM can choose an effect springs up. Any creature that eats an egg
from the following table or determine it randomly. makes a DC 20 Constitution saving throw.
1d100 effect Ona successful save, a creature perma-

(01 —_5d4 toadstools sprout. Ifa creature eats a nently Increases its lowest ability score
toadstool,
ee ts
roll any die. On an odd roll, the ty Terandomly choesinglammeng equaly
low scores. On a failed save, the creature
ASR ccuie titsy rake Sde Poteah dare tes 10d6 Force damage from an internal

age and have the Poisoned condition for 1 Sposion:
hour. On an even roll, the eater gains Sd6 91-95 A pyramid with a 60-foot-square base
Temporary Hit Points for 1 hour, bursts upward. Inside is a burial chamber
02-10 A geyser erupts and spouts water, beer, Contal Ses uta) a Ale) Lord) of
ravens ven; vinecaralipelondll some other Undead ofthe DM's choice.
{DM's choice) 30 feet into the air for 124 Its sarcophagus contains treasure of the
‘hiniitess DM's choice.

11-20 A Treant sprouts. Roll any die. On an odd 26-00; igant beanie seul gowns a
roll, the treant is Chaotic Evil. On an even Heeb.gf the Dis cholcs: [fe vor leat)
ied eerntic chic coel where the DM chooses, such as to a great
- = iew, a cloud giant's castle, or another
21-30 An animate but immobile stone statue plete or austere if
in your likeness rises and makes verbal
threats against you. If you leave it and
others come near, it describes you as the
most heinous ofvillains and directs the
newcomers to find and attack you. Ifyou
are on the same plane ofexistence as the
statue, it knows where you are. The statue
becomes inanimate after 24 hours.

31-40 A campfire with green flames springs
forth and burns for 24 hours or until it is
extinguished.
41-50 Three Shrieker Fungi sprout.

Baa oF Beans

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 233

Bac oF DEvourinG
Ba oF TRICKS
Wondrous Item, Very Rare
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
This bag resembles a Bag of Holding
but is a feeding This bag made from gray, rust, or tan cloth appears.
orifice for a gigantic extradimensional creature.
empty. Reaching inside the bag, however, reveals the
Turning the bag inside out closes the orifice.
presence of a small, fuzzy object,
The extradimensional creature attached to the
You can take a Magic action to pull the fuzzy ob-
bag can sense whatever is placed inside the bag.
ject from the bag and throw it up to 20 feet. When
Animal or vegetable matter placed wholly in the
the object lands, it transforms into a creature you
bag is devoured and lost forever. When part of a
determine by rolling on the table that corresponds
living creature is placed in the bag, as happens when
to the bag's color. See the Monster Manual for the
someone reaches inside it, there is a 50 percent
creature's stat block. The creature vanishes at the
chance that the creature is pulled inside the bag. A
next dawn or when it is reduced to 0 Hit Points.
creature inside the bag can take an action to try to
The creature is Friendly to you and your allies,
escape, doing so with a successful DC 15 Strength
and it acts immediately after you on your Initiative
(Athletics) check. Another creature can take an ac-
count. You can take a Bonus Action to command
tion to reach into the bag to pull a creature out, do-
how the creature moves and what action it takes on
ing so with a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics)
its next turn, such as attacking an enemy. In the ab-
check, provided the puller isn't pulled inside the bag
sence of such orders, the creature acts in a fashion
first. Any creature that starts its turn inside the bag
appropriate to its nature.
is devoured, its body destroyed,
Once three fuzzy objects have been pulled from
Inanimate objects can be stored in the bag, which
the bag, the bag can't be used again until the next
can hold a cubic foot of such material. However,
dawn,
once each day, the bag swallows any objects inside it
and spits them out into another plane of existence.
Gray Bac oF Tricks
‘The DM determines the time and plane.
1d8 Creature 1d8 Creature
If the bag is pierced or torn, itis destroyed, and
anything contained within it is transported to a 1 Weasel 5 Panther
random location on the Astral Plane. 2 Giant Rat 6 — Giant Badger
3 Badger 7 Dire Wolf
Bac or HoLpinc 4 Boar 8 — Giant Elk
Wondrous Item, Uncommon

This bag has an interior space considerably larger Rust Bac oF Tricks
than its outside dimensions—roughly 2 feet square 1d8 Creature 1d8 Creature
and 4 feet deep on the inside. The bag can hold up
1 Rat 5 Giant Goat
to 500 pounds, not exceeding a volume of 64 cubic
feet. The bag weighs 5 pounds, regardless of its 2 owl 6 — Giant Boar
contents. Retrieving an item from the bag requires a 3 Masti 7 Lion
Utilize actio
4 Goat 8 Brown Bear
If the bag is overloaded, pierced, or torn, itis de-
stroyed, and its contents are scattered in the Astral
TAN Bac OF Tricks
Plane. If the bag is turned inside out, its contents
spill forth unharmed, but the bag must be put right 1d8 Creature 1d8-— Creature
before it can be used again. The bag holds enough 1 Jackal 5 Black Bear
air for 10 minutes of breathing, divided by the num-
2 Ape 6 — Giant Weasel
ber of breathing creatures inside.
Placing a Bag of Holding inside an extradimen- 3 Baboon 7 Giant Hyena
sional space created by a Heward'’s Handy Haversack, 4 Axe Beak 8 Tiger
Portable Hole, or similar item instantly destroys both
items and opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate
originates where the one item was placed inside the BEAD OF Force
other. Any creature within a 10-foot-radius Sphere Wondrous Item, Rare
centered on the gate is sucked through it to a ran-
This small black sphere measures 3/4 of an inch in
dom location on the Astral Plane. The gate then
diameter and weighs an ounce. Typically, 1d4 + 4
closes. The gate is one-way and can’t be reopened.
Beads of Force are found together.

234 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Bac oF Mowoine

Bac oF Taices

Bas oF Devourine

You can take a Magic action to throw the bead
up to 60 feet. The bead explodes in a 10-foot-radius
Sphere on impact and is destroyed. Each creature
in the Sphere must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity
saving throw or take 5d4 Force damage. A sphere
of transparent force then encloses the area for 1 Beur oF
minute. Any creature that failed the save and is Dwaavennino

completely within the area is trapped inside this
sphere. Creatures that succeeded on the save or are
partially within the area are pushed away from the
center of the sphere until they are no longer inside
it. Only breathable air can pass through the sphere’s
Bett or DWARVENKIND
wall, No attack or other effect can pass through.
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
An enclosed creature can take a Utilize action to
push against the sphere’s wall, moving the sphere While wearing this belt, you gain the following
up to half the creature’s Speed. The sphere can be benefits:
picked up, and its magic causes it to weigh only 1 Dwarvish. You know Dwarvish.
pound, regardless of the weight of creatures inside. Friend of Dwarvenkind. You have Advantage on
Charisma (Persuasion) checks made to interact
with dwarves and duergar.
BEAD oF NOURISHMENT Toughness. Your Constitution increases by 2, toa
Wondrous Item, Common maximum of 20.
This flavorless, gelatinous bead dissolves on your
In addition, while attuned to the belt, you have a 50
tongue and provides as much nourishment as 1 day
percent chance each day at dawn of growing a full
of Rations.
beard if you can grow one, ora thicker beard if you
already have one.
Ifyou aren't a dwarf or duergar, you gain the fol-
BEAD OF REFRESHMENT
lowing additional benefits while wearing the belt:
Wondrous Item, Common
This flavorless, gelatinous bead dissolves in liquid, Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of
transforming up to a pint ofthe liquid into fresh, 60 feet.
Resilience. You have Resistance to Poison damage.
cold drinking water. The bead has no effect on mag-
ical liquids or harmful substances such as poison. You also have Advantage on saving throws you
make to avoid or end the Poisoned condition.

CHAPTER7|TREASURE 235

also have Disadvantage on attack rolls with weap-
Bex oF GIANT STRENGTH ons other than this one.
Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement) Whenever another creature damages you while
the weapon is in your possession, you must succeed
While wearing this belt, your Strength changes to
ona DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or go berserk.
a score granted by the belt. The type of giant deter-
This berserk state ends when you start your turn
mines the score (see the table below). The item has
and there are no creatures within 60 feet of you
no effect on you if your Strength without the belt is
that you can see or hear.
equal to or greater than the belt’s score.
While berserk, you regard the creature nearest
Belt Str. Rarity to you that you can see or hear as your enemy. If

Belt of Giant Strength (hill) 21—-Rare there are multiple possible creatures, choose one at
random. On each ofyour turns, you must move as
Belt of Giant Strength (frost. 23. Very Rare
close to the creature as possible and take the Attack
or stone)
action, targeting the creature. If you're unable to
Belt of Giant Strength (fire) 25 Very Rare get close enough to the creature to attack it with

Belt of Giant Strength (cloud) 27 Legendary
the weapon, your turn ends after you've used up all
your available movement. If the creature dies or can
Belt of Giant Strength (storm) 29 Legendary
no longer be seen or heard by you, the next nearest
creature that you can see or hear becomes your
new target.
BERSERKER AXE
Weapon (Battleaxe, Greataxe, or Halberd), Rare
(Requires Attunement) BLACKRAZOR
You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls Weapon (Greatsword), Artifact (Requires Attunement)
made with this magic weapon. In addition, while Hidden in the dungeon of White Plume Mount:
you are attuned to this weapon, your Hit Point Blackrazor shines like a piece ofnight sky filled with
maximum increases by 1 for each level you have
stars. Its black scabbard is decorated with pieces of
attained. cut obsidian,
Curse. This weapon is cursed, and becoming at-
tuned to it extends the curse to you. As long as you
remain cursed, you are unwilling to part with the
‘weapon, keeping it within reach at all times. You Bensener
Axe
(Barrucaxe)

Betr or Gawr
Sraenars (Fine)

Bevr or Gianr
Sraewars (Stone)

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage
rolls made with this magic weapon. If you hit an
Undead with this weapon, you take 1d10 Necrotic
damage, and the target regains 1d10 Hit Points. If
this Necrotic damage reduces you to 0 Hit Points,
Blackrazor devours your soul (see “Devour Soul”
below).
While you hold this weapon, you have Immunity
to the Charmed and Frightened conditions, and you
have Blindsight with a range of 30 feet.
Devour Soul. Whenever you use Blackrazor to
reduce a creature to 0 Hit Points, the sword slays
the creature and devours its soul unless it is a Con-
struct or an Undead. A creature whose soul has
been devoured by Blackrazor can be restored to life
only by a Wish spell.
When Blackrazor devours a soul that isn't yours,
you gain Temporary Hit Points equal to the slain
creature's Hit Point maximum.
Haste. Blackrazor can cast Haste on you, after
which it can't cast this spell again until the next
dawn. Blackrazor decides when to cast the spell,
which takes effect at the start of your turn. The
spell lasts for 1 minute (no Concentration required)
or until Blackrazor decides to end it, which it can do
at the end of any ofyour turns.
Sentience. Blackrazor is a sentient Chaotic Neutral
weapon with an Intelligence of 17, a Wisdom of 10,
and a Charisma of 19. It has hearing and Darkvision
out to 120 feet.
‘The weapon speaks Common and can communi-
BOOK OF EXALTED DEEDS
cate with its wielder telepathically. Its voice is deep Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement)

and echoing. While you are attuned to it, Blackrazor The definitive treatise on all that is good in the
also understands every language you know. multiverse, the Book of Exalted Deeds figures promi-
Personality. Blackrazor speaks with an imperious nently in many religions. Rather than being a scrip-
tone, as though accustomed to being obeyed. ture devoted to a particular faith, the book's au-
‘The sword’s purpose is to consume souls. It thors filled the pages with their own visions of true
doesn’t care whose souls it eats, including the wield- virtue, providing guidance for defeating evil.
er’s. The sword believes that all matter and energy The Book of Exalted Deeds rarely lingers in one
sprang from a void of negative energy and will one place. As soon as the book is read, it vanishes to
day return to it. Blackrazor is meant to hurry that some other corner ofthe multiverse where its moral
process along. guidance can bring hope to an endangered world.
Despite its nihilism, Blackrazor feels a strange kin- Although attempts have been made to copy the
ship to Wave and Whelm, two other weapons locked work, efforts to do so fail to capture its magical na-
away under White Plume Mountain. It wants the ture or translate the benefits it offers to those pure
three weapons to be reunited and wielded together of heart and firm of purpose.
in combat, even though it violently disagrees with A heavy clasp, wrought to look like angel wings,
Whelm and finds Wave tedious. keeps the book's contents secure. Only a creature
Blackrazor's hunger for souls must be regularly that is attuned to the book can release the clasp that
fed. If the sword goes 3 days or more without con- holds it shut. Once the book is opened, the attuned
suming a soul, a conflict between it and its wielder creature must spend 80 hours reading and studying
occurs at the next sunset. the book to digest its contents and gain its benefits.
Destroying Blackrazor. Blackrazor can be destroyed Other creatures that peruse the book's open pages
by crushing it in the great gears of Mechanus. Pri- can read the text but glean no deeper meaning and
mus, the creator of the modrons, also knows a series reap no benefits. A Fiend, an Undead, or a servant of
of musical tones that Blackrazor can't stand to hear, a god from the Lower Planes that tries to read from
causing the sword to shatter. the book takes 24d6 Radiant damage. This damage

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 237

ignores Resistance and Immunity, and it can't be re- Action. While present, the halo gives you Advan-
duced or avoided by any means. A creature reduced tage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks. In addition,
to 0 Hit Points by this damage disappears in a flash Fiends and Undead within the halo’s Bright Light
and is destroyed, leaving its possessions behind. The make attack rolls against you with Disadvantage.
book then vanishes, and the creature's Attunement Random Properties. The Book of Exalted Deeds has
toit ends, the following random properties (see “Artifacts” in
Benefits granted by the Book of Exalted Deeds last this chapter):
only as long as you strive to do good. If you fail to
+ 2minor beneficial properties
perform at least one act of kindness or generosity
+ 2 major beneficial properties
within the span of 10 days, or if you willingly per-
form an evil act, you lose all the benefits granted by Destroying the Book. The Book of Exalted Deeds
the book. can't be destroyed. However, drowning the book
Celestial Calm. While attuned to the book, you in the River Styx removes all writing and imagery
have Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened from its pages and renders the book powerless for
conditions and Resistance to Psychic damage. 14100 years.
These benefits become permanent after you spend
ite amount of time reading and studying
BOOK OF VILE DARKNESS
Divine Wisdom. After you spend the requisite Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement)
amount of time reading and studying the book, The contents ofthis foul manuscript are the meat
your Wisdom increases by 2, to a maximum of 24, and drink of the wicked. It contains knowledge so
You can't gain this benefit from the book more horrid that to even glimpse the scrawled pages in-
than once. vites doom.
Enlightened Magic. After you spend the requisite Most believe the lich-god Vecna authored the
amount of time reading and studying the book, any Book of Vile Darkness. He recorded in its pages every
spell slot you expend to cast a spell counts as a spell
slot of one level higher.
Halo. After you spend the requisite amount of
time reading and studyin
the
g book, you gain a
protective halo. This halo sheds Bright Light in a 10-
foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet.
‘You can dismiss or manifest the halo as a Bonus

Boow or Vie
Dareness

Book or
Exacreo Deeos

238 CHAPTER? | TREASURE

horrid idea, every corrupt thought, and every exam- Once you use the book to cast a spell, you can’t cast
ple of fou! magic he came across or devised. that spell again from it until the next dawn.
Other practitioners of evil have added their own Vile Lore. You can reference the Book of Vile Dark-
input to the book's catalog of vile knowledge. Their ness whenever you make an Intelligence check to
additions are clear, for the writers of later works recall information about some aspect ofevil, such as
stitched whatever they were writing into the tome lore about demons. When you do so, you have Ad-
or, in some cases, made notations and additions vantage on that check.
to existing text. There are places where pages are At the DM's discretion, the book might reveal
missing, torn, or covered so completely with ink, secrets no mortal should know, such as the true
blood, and scratches that the original text can't be names of powerful Fiends, foul rites that allow one
divined. to transform into a death knight or lich, or long-lost
Nature can’t abide the book's presence. Ordinary spells crafted by beings so evil their names ought
plants wither in its presence, common animals are never to be spoken aloud.
unwilling to approach it, and the book gradually Vile Speech. While the book is on your person,
destroys whatever it touches. Even stone cracks and you can take a Magic action to recite words from
turns to powder if the book rests on it long enough. its pages in a foul, dead language. Each time you do
Whenever a creature that isn’t a Fiend or an 80, you take 1d12 Psychic damage, and each creature
Undead attunes to the Book of Vile Darkness, that within 15 feet of you takes 346 Psychic damage un-
creature makes a DC 17 Charisma saving throw. On less the creature is a Fiend or an Undead.
a failed save, the creature is magically transformed Destroying the Book. The Book of Vile Darkness
into a Larva under the DM's control. Only a Wish allows pages to be torn from it, but any evil lore
spell can reverse this vile transformation. contained on those pages finds its way back into the
A creature attuned to the book must spend 80 book eventually, usually when a new author adds
hours reading and studying it to digest its contents pages to the tome.
and use its Adjusted Ability Scores, Tireless Form, Ifa solar tears the book in two, the book is de~
Spells, Vile Lore, and Vile Speech properties. stroyed for 1d100 years, after which it re-forms in
‘The Book of Vile Darkness remains with you only some far corner of the multiverse.
as long as you strive to work evil in the world. If you A creature attuned to the book for 100 years can
fail to perform at least one evil act within the span unearth a phrase hidden in the original text that,
of 10 days, or if you willingly perform a good act, when translated to Celestial and spoken aloud, de-
the book disappears, your Attunement to it ends im- stroys both the speaker and the book in a flash of
mediately, and you lose all benefits granted by it. If radiance. However, as long
as evil exists in the mul-
you die while attuned to the book, an entity of great tiverse, the book re-forms 1d10 « 100 years later.
evil claims your soul. You can't be restored to life by
any means while your soul remains imprisoned.
Adjusted Ability Scores. One ability score of your Boors OF ELVENKIND
choice increases by 2, to 2 maximum of 24. Another Wondrous Item, Uncommon
ability score of your choice decreases by 2, to a min- While you wear these boots, your steps make no
imum of 3. The book can't adjust your ability scores sound, regardless of the surface you are moving
again. across. You also have Advantage on Dexterity
Tireless Form. While the book is on your person, (Stealth) checks.
you have Immunity to the Exhaustion condition,
Random Properties. The Book of Vile Darkness has
the following random properties (see “Artifacts” in Boors OF FALSE TRACKS
this chapter): Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement)
+ 3 minor beneficial properties While wearing these boots, you can have them leave
+ Lmajor beneficial property tracks like those of any kind of Humanoid of your
+ 3 minor detrimental properties size.
+ 2 major detrimental properties

Spells. While holding the book and holding it, you
Boots oF LEVITATION
can cast the following spells (save DC 18) from
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
+ Animate Dead
While you wear these boots, you can cast Levitate
+ Circle of Death
on yourself,
+ Dominate Monster
+ Finger of Death

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 239,

Sera,

Bow. oF Commanoing
Waren Evemenracs
Boors or Speco

Boors oF Sraaine

Boors or re
Winrencanios

Boors or
Ecvennina

Cold Resistance. You have Resistance to Cold
Boots oF SPEED damage and can tolerate temperatures of O degrees
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) Fahrenheit or lower without any additional
protection,
While you wear these boots, you can take a Bonus
Winter Strider. You ignore Difficult Terrain cre-
Action to click the boots’ heels together. If you do,
ated by ice or snow.
the boots double your Speed, and any creature that
makes an Opportunity Attack against you has Dis-
advantage on the attack roll. If you click your heels
BowL OF COMMANDING WATER
together again, you end the effect.
ELEMENTALS
When you've used the boots’ property for a total
Wondrous Item, Rare
of 10 minutes, the magic ceases to function for you
While this bow! is filled with water and you are
until you finish a Long Rest.
within 5 feet of it, you can take a Magic action to
summon a Water Elemental, The elemental ap-
BOors OF STRIDING AND SPRINGING pears in an unoccupied space as close to the bowl as

Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) possible, understands your languages, obeys your
commands, and takes its turn immediately after you
While you wear these boots, your Speed becomes
on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears
30 feet unless your Speed is higher, and your Speed
after 1 hour, when it dies, or when you dismiss it as
isn't reduced by you carrying weight in excess of
a Bonus Action. The bow! can't be used this way
your carrying capacity or wearing Heavy Armor.
again until the next dawn.
Once on each of your turns, you can jump up to
‘The bow! is about 1 foot in diameter and half as,
30 feet by spending only 10 feet of movement.
deep. It holds about 3 gallons.

Boots OF THE WINTERLANDS
BRACERS OF ARCHERY
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
These furred boots are snug and feel warm. While
‘While wearing these bracers, you have proficiency
wearing them, you gain the following benefits,
with the Longbow and Shortbow, and you gain a +2
bonus to damage rolls made with such weapons.

240 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Broocn oF
Swiecoins

Broom oF

Braceas oF
Archery

Brazier
oF
Conmanoine
Fine Evemenracs

BRACERS OF DEFENSE BROOM OF FLYING
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
While wearing these bracers, you gain a +2 bonus to This wooden broom functions like a mundane
Armor Class if you are wearing no armor and using broom until you stand astride it and take a Magic
no Shield. action to make it hover beneath you, at which time
it can be ridden in the air. It has a Fly Speed of 50
feet. It can carry up to 400 pounds, but its Fly
BRAZIER OF COMMANDING FIRE Speed becomes 30 feet while carrying over 200
ELEMENTALS pounds. The broom stops hovering when you land
Wondrous Item, Rare ‘or when you're no longer riding it.
While you are within 5 feet ofthis brazier, you can ‘As a Magic action, you can send the broom to
take a Magic action to summon a Fire Elemental. travel alone to a destination within 1 mile of you if
The elemental appears in an unoccupied space as you name the location and are familiar with it. The
close to the brazier as possible, understands your broom comes back to you when you take a Magi

languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn action and use a command word if the broom is still
immediately after you on your Initiative count. The within I mile of you.
elemental disappears after1 hour, when it dies, or
when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The brazier
can't be used this way again until the next dawn CANDLE OF INVOCATION
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
This candle’s magic is activated when the candle is
BROOCH OF SHIELDING lit, which requires a Magic action, After burning
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) for4 hours, the candle is destroyed. You can snuff
While wearing this brooch, you have Resistance to it out early for use at a later time. Deduct the time it
Force damage, and you have Immunity to damage burned in increments of1 minute from its total burn
from the Magic Missile spell. time.
While lit, the candle sheds Dim Light in a 30-foot
radius, While you are within that light, you have
‘Advantage on D20 Tests. In addition, a Cleric or
Druid in the light can cast level I spells they have
prepared without expending spell slots.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 241

Alternatively, when you light the candle for the Magic action. This property can't be used again
first time, you can cast Gate with it. Doing so de- until the next dawn,
stroys the candle. The portal created by the spell ‘When you teleport with that spell, you leave be-
links to a particular Outer Plane chosen by the DM hind a cloud of smoke. The space you left is Lightly
or determined by rolling on the following table. Obscured by that smoke until the end of your

14100 Outer Plane next turn.
14100 Outer Plane
01-05. Abyss 55-59 Gehenna

06-10 Acheron 60-64 Hades Cap OF WATER BREATHING
NAW Arborea Wondrous Item, Uncommon
65-69 Limbo
While wearing this cap underwater, you can take a
18-25 Arcadia 70-77 Mechanus
Magic action to create a bubble of air around your
26-33 Beastlands 78-85 Mount Celestia head. This bubble allows you to breathe normally
34-41 Bytopia 86-90 Nine Hells underwater. This bubble stays with you until the
cap is removed or you are no longer underwater.
42-46 Carceri 91-95 Pandemonium
47-54 Elysium 96-00 Ysgard

Carpet oF FLYING
Wondrous Item, Very Rare
CANDLE OF THE DEEP
You can make this carpet hover and fly by taking a
Wondrous Item, Common
Magic action and using the carpet’s command word.
The flame of this candle isn't extinguished when It moves according to your directions if you are
immersed in water. It gives off light and heat like a within 30 feet of it.
normal candle. Four sizes of Carpet of Flying exist. The DM
chooses the size of a given carpet or determines it
randomly by rolling on the following table. A car-
CAPE OF THE MOUNTEBANK pet can carry up to twice the weight shown on the
Wondrous Item, Rare table, but its Fly Speed is halved if it carries more
This cape smells faintly of brimstone. While wear- than its normal capacity.
ing it, you can use it to cast Dimension Door as a

Cancer oF Fuvine

Care oF re
Mounresank

Z

Canote oF
Invocation.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

q
}
f

1d100 Size Capacity Fly Speed If you place the corpse ofaHumanoid into the
cauldron and cover the corpse with 200 pounds of
01-20 3ft.xSft. —2001b. 80 feet
salt (which costs 10 GP) for at least 8 hours, the salt
I-55 4ft.x6ft. 400 Ib. 60 feet is consumed and the creature returns to life as if by
56-80 Sft.x7ft. 600 Ib. 40 feet Raise Dead at the next dawn. Once used, this prop-

81-00 6ft.x9ft. 800 Ib. 30 feet erty can't be used again for 7 days.

CENSER OF CONTROLLING AIR ELEMENTALS
Cast-OFF ARMOR
Wondrous Item, Rare
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Common
While gently swinging this censer, you can take a
You can doff this armor as a Magic action.
Magic action to summon an Air Elemental. The
elemental appears in an unoccupied space as close
to the censeras possible, understands your lan-
CauLpron oF REBIRTH
guages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by
a
immediately after you on your Initiative count. The
Druid or Warlock)
elemental disappears after1 hour, when it dies, or
‘This Tiny pot bears relief scenes of heroes on its when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The censer
cast-iron sides. can't be used this way again until the next dawn.
You can use the cauldron as a Spellcasting Focus
for your spells, and it functions as a suitable compo-
nent for the Scrying spell. Cuarzatan’s Diz
Brew Potion. When you finish a Long Rest, you Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement)
can use the cauldron to create a Potion of Healing
Whenever you roll this six-sided die, you can con-
(greater), which takes I minute. The potion lasts for trol which number it rolls.
24 hours, then loses its magic if not consumed.
Raise Dead. As a Magic action, you can cause the
cauldron to grow large enough for a Medium crea-
ture to crouch within. You can revert the cauldron
to its normal size as a Magic action, harmlessly
shunting anything that can’t fit inside to the nearest
‘unoccupied space.

Cauconon or
Revinrn

Conraouiin e
Ain

Cuaacaran’ s
Die

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 243,

Cinceer oF Buasring

Crom or
Dispuacemenr
Cue oF Orenine

CHIME oF OPENING
Wondrous Item, Rare
This hollow metal tube measures about 1 foot long CLoak oF BILLOWING
and weighs 1 pound. As a Magic action, you can Wondrous Item, Common
strike the chime to cast Knock. The spell's custom- While wearing this cloak, you can take a Bonus
ary knocking sound is replaced by the clear, ringing Action to make it billow dramatically for| minute.
tone of the chime, which is audible out to 300 feet.
The chime can be used 10 times. After the tenth
time, it cracks and becomes useless. Coax oF DisPLACEMENT
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)

While you wear this cloak, it magically projects
Circiet oF BLASTING an
illusion that makes you appear
to be standing
in a
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
place near your actual location, causing any
crea-
While wearing this circlet, you can cast Scorching ture to have Disadvantage on attack rolls against
Ray with it (+5 to hit). The circlet can't cast this spell you. If you take damage, the property ceases to
again until the next dawn. function until the start of your next turn. This
property is suppressed while your Speed
is 0.

CLOAK OF ARACHNIDA
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attune
ment) CLoak oF ELVENKIND
This fine garment is made of black silk interwoven Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attuneme
nt)
, silvery threads. While wearing it, you While you wear this cloak, Wisdom (Perception)
gain the following benefits. checks made to perceive you have Disadvantage,
Poison Resistance. You have Resistance to Poison and you have Advantage on Dexterity (Ste
alth)
damage. checks.
Spider Climb. You have a Climb Speed equal to
your Speed and can move up, down, and across ver-
tical surfaces and along ceilings, while leaving
your
CLoax oF InvistBrLity
hands free. Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement)
Spider Walk. You can't be caught in webs of any
This cloak has 3 charges and regains 13 expended
sort and can move through webs as if they were
Dif charges daily at dawn. While wearing the cloak, you
ficult Terrain,
can take a Magic action to pull its hood over
your
Web. You can cast Web (save DC 13). The web
head and expend I charge to give yourself the Invi
s-
created by the spell fills twice its normal area. Once
ible condition for 1 hour. The effect ends early if you
used, this property can’t be used again until the
pull the hood down (no action required) or
cease
next dawn.
‘wearing the cloak.

244 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

honk or
Prorecrion

Cooak of re

Mansa Ray

coax or
Croaw or
Many Faswions

CLOAK OF MANY FASHIONS
Wondrous Item, Common
CLOAK OF THE MANTA Ray
While wearing this cloak, you can take a Bonus Ac-
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
tion to change the style, color, and apparent quality
of the garment. The cloak’s weight doesn't change. While wearing this cloak, you can breathe under-
Regardless ofits appearance, the cloak can't be any- water, and you have a Swim Speed of 60 feet.
thing but a cloak. Although it can duplicate the ap-
pearance of other magic cloaks, it doesn't gain their
magical properties. CLOCKWORK AMULET
Wondrous Item, Common

‘This copper amulet contains tiny interlocking gears
CLOAK OF PROTECTION and is powered by magic from Mechanus, a plane of
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) clockwork predictability. Faint ticking and whirring
You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class and saving noises emanate from within.
throws while you wear this cloak. ‘When you make an attack roll while wearing the
amulet, you can forgo rolling the 420 to get a 10 on
the die. Once used, this property can't be used again
CLOAK OF THE BaT until the next dawn,
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)

While wearing this cloak, you have Advantage on
CLOTHES OF MENDING
Dexterity (Stealth) checks. In an area of Dim Light
Wondrous Item, Common
or Darkness, you can grip the edges of the cloak and
useit to gain a Fly Speed of 40 feet. If you ever fail This elegant outfit magically mends itself to coun-
to grip the cloak’s edges while flying in this way, or teract daily wear and tear. Pieces of the outfit that
if you are no longer in Dim Light or Darkness, you are destroyed can't be repaired in this way.

lose this Fly Speed.
While wearing the cloak in an area of Dim Light
or Darkness, you can cast Polymorph on yourself, CrysTat BaLL
shape-shifting into a Bat. While in that form, you Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)

retain your Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Scry-
scores. The cloak can't be used this way again until ing (save DC 17) with it
the next dawn.

CHAP
7| TREASU
TER RE 245

CrysTat BALL OF MIND READING
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement)

While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Scry-
ing (save DC 17) with it. In addition, you can cast
Detect Thoughts (save DC 17) targeting creatures
you can see within 30 feet of the spell’s sensor. You
don't need to concentrate on this Detect Thoughts
spell to maintain it during its duration, but it ends if
the Scrying spell ends.

CrysTaL BALL OF TELEPATHY
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement)

While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Scry-
ing (save DC 17) with it. In addition, you can com-
municate telepathically with creatures you can see
within 30 feet ofthe spell’s sensor. You can also cast
Suggestion (save DC 17) through the sensor on one
of those creatures. You don't need to concentrate
on this Suggestion to maintain it during its duration,
but it ends if Scrying ends. You can't cast Suggestion
in this way again until the next dawn.

CrysTAL BALL OF TRUE SEEING
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement)

While touching this crystal orb, you can cast
Scrying (save DC 17) with it. In addition, you have
Truesight with a range of 120 feet centered on the
spell’s sensor,

Cuse oF Force
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)

This cube is about an inch across. Each face hasa
distinct marking on it. You can press one ofthose
faces, expend the number of charges required for
it, and thereby cast the spell associated with it (save
DC 17), as shown in the Cube of Force Faces table.
The cube starts with 10 charges, and it regains 146
expended charges daily at dawn,

Cuse oF Force Faces
Spell Charge Cost
Mage Armor 1
Shield 1

Leomund's Tiny Hut

Mordenkainen's Private Sanctum

Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere

Wall of Force

Cuse OF SUMMONING
Wondrous Item, Rare

This Tiny cube looks like a jack-in-the-box. When
you wind its crank as a Magic action, a merry tune
emits from the box, the lid pops open, a creature Dacan's Instant
appears in the nearest unoccupied space, and the lid Forraess
closes. The lid can't otherwise be opened.
Roll on the Cube of Summoning table to deter-
mine which spell the cube casts to summon the fiyecks
creature. The spell is cast at level 5 (save DC 17, +9
attack bonus) and doesn’t require Concentration,
but you otherwise function as the spell’s caster.
‘Once the cube summons a creature, the cube can't
do so again until the next dawn.

CuBe OF SUMMONING
1d6 Spell

1 Summon Aberration

2 Summon Beast

3 Summon Construct

4 Summon Dragon

5 Summon Elemental
6 — Summon Fey

Cusic GaTE
Wondrous Item, Legendary

This cube is 3 inches across and radiates palpable
magical energy. The six sides of the cube are each
keyed to a different plane of existence, one of which
is the Material Plane. The other sides are linked to
planes determined by the DM.
The cube has 3 charges and regains 143 expended Cure oF
Force
charges daily at dawn. As a Magic action, you can
expend 1 of the cube's charges to cast one of the fol-
lowing spells using the cube.
Gate. Pressing
one side ofthe cube, you cast Gate,
opening a portal to the plane of existence keyed to
Cuse oF
that side. Summoning
Plane Shift. Pressing one side of the cube twice,
you cast Plane Shift, transporting the targets to the
plane ofexistence keyed to that side.

Daern’s INSTANT FORTRESS
to an unoccupied space outside but next to the
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
tower. Objects in the area that aren't being worn or
As a Magic action, you can place this inch carried are also pushed clear of the tower,
adamantine statuette on the ground and, using The tower is 20 feet on a side and 30 feet high,
a command word, cause it to grow rapidly into a with arrow slits on all sides and a battlement atop it.
square adamantine tower. Repeating the command Its interior is divided into two floors, with a ladder,
word causes the tower to revert to statuette form, staircase, or ramp (your choice) connecting them.
which works only if the tower is empty. Each crea- This ladder, staircase, or ramp ends at a trapdoor
ture in the area where the tower appears is pushed leading to the roof. When created, the tower has a

CHAPTER 7|TREASURE 247

single door at ground level on the side facing you. creature of your choice within 5 feet of itself. The
The door opens only at your command, which you ‘weapon uses your attack roll and adds your ability
can issue as a Bonus Action. It is immune to the modifier to damage rolls.
Knock spell and similar magic. While the weapon hovers, you can take a Bonus
Magic prevents the tower from being tipped over. Action to cause it to fly up to 30 feet to another
‘The roof, the door, and the walls each have AC 20; spot within 30 feet ofyou. As part of the same Bo-
HP 100; Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and nus Action, you can cause the weapon to attack one
Slashing damage except that which is dealt by siege creature within 5 feet of the weapon.
equipment; and Resistance to all other damage. After the hovering weapon attacks for the fourth
Shrinking the tower back down to statuette form time, it flies back to you and tries to return to your
doesn't repair damage to the tower. Only a Wish hand. If you have no hand free, the weapon fails to
spell can repair the tower (this use of the spell the ground in your space. If the weapon has no un-
counts as replicating a spell of level 8 or lower). obstructed path to you, it moves as close to you as
Each casting of Wish causes the tower to regain all it can and then falls to the ground. It also ceases to
its Hit Points. hover
if you grasp it or are more than 30 feet away
from it.

Daccer or VENOM
Weapon (Dagger), Rare Dark SHARD AMULET
You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement bya
made with this magic weapon. Warlock)
You can take a Bonus Action to magically coat the This amulet is fashioned from a shard of resilient
blade with poison. The poison remains forI minute material originating from an otherworldly realm.
or until an attack using this weapon hits a creature. While you are wearing it, you gain the following
That creature must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution benefits.
saving throw or take 2d10 Poison damage and have Spellcasting Focus. You can use the amulet as a
the Poisoned condition for 1 minute. The weapon Spellcasting Focus for your Warlock spells.
can't be used this way again until the next dawn. Unknown Spell. As a Magic action, you can try
to cast a cantrip that you don’t know. The cantrip
must be on the Warlock spell list and have a casting
Dancinc SworD time of an action, and you make a DC 10 Intelli-
Weapon (Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or gence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you
Shortsword), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) cast the spell. On a failed check, the spell fails, and
You can take a Bonus Action to toss this magic the action used to cast it is wasted. In either case,
weapon into the air. When you do so, the weapon you can't use this property again until you finish a

begins to hover, flies up to 30 feet, and attacks one Long Rest.

Daccea or Venom

Dare Swano
Amucer

Daneins Swono
Decanren oF
(Lonasworo)
Enovess Waren

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

DECK oF ILLUSIONS
DECANTER OF ENDLESS WATER 1d100 Hlusion*
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
01-03 ‘Adult Red Dragon
This stoppered flask sloshes when shaken, as if it
04-06 Archmage
contains water. The decanter weighs 2 pounds.
You can take a Magic action to remove the stop- 07-09 Assassin
per and issue one of three command words, where- 10-12 Bandit Captain
upon an amount of fresh water or salt water (your
Bas Beholder
choice) pours out of the flask. The water stops pour-
ing out at the start of your next turn. Choose from 16-18 Berserker
the following command words: 19-21 Bugbear Warrior
Splash. The decanter produces 1 gallon of water. 22-24 Cloud Giant
Fountain. The decanter produces 5 gallons of water.
25-27 Druid
Geyser. The decanter produces 30 gallons of water
that gushes forth in a Line 30 feet long and | foot 28-30 Erinyes

wide. If you're holding the decanter, you can aim 31-33 Ettin
the geyser in one direction (no action required).
34-36 Fire Giant
One creature of your choice in the Line must suc~
ceed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or take 37-39 Frost Giant
1d4 Bludgeoning damage and have the Prone con- 40-42 Gnoll Warrior
dition. Instead of a creature, you can target one
43-45 Goblin Warrior
object in the Line that isn't being worn or carried
and that weighs no more than 200 pounds. The 46-48 Guardian Naga
object is knocked over by the geyser. 49-51 Hill Giant
52-54 Hobgoblin Warrior

Deck oF ILLUSIONS 55-57 Incubus
Wondrous Item, Uncommon 58-60 Iron Golem
This box contains a set of cards. A full deck has 34 61-63 Knight
cards: 32 depicting specific creatures and two with
a mirrored surface. A deck found as treasure is ust
64-66 Kobold Wartior
ally missing 1420 - 1 cards, 67-69 Lich
‘The magic of the deck functions only if its cards 70-72 Medusa
are drawn at random. You can take a Magic action
73-75 Night Hag
to draw a card at random from the deck and throw
it to the ground at a point within 30 feet of yourself. 76-78 Ogre
An illusion of a creature, determined by rolling on 79-81 Oni
the Deck of Illusions table, forms over the thrown
82-84 Priest
card and remains until dispelled. The illusory crea-
ture created by the card looks and behaves like a 85-87 Succubus
real creature of its kind, except that it can do no 88-90 Troll
harm. While you are within 120 feet of the illusory
91-93 Veteran Warrior
creature and can see it, you can take a Magic action.
to move it anywhere within 30 feet of its card. 94-96 Wyvern
Any physical interaction with the illusory crea- 97-00 The card drawer
ture reveals it to be false, because objects pass
"Stat blocks for these creatures (except the
through it. A creature that takes a Study action to the Monster Manual
visually inspect the illusory creature identifies it as
an illusion with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (In-
vestigation) check. The illusion lasts until its card
is moved or the illusion is dispelled (using a Dispel
Magic spell or a similar effect). When the illusion
ends, the image on its card disappears, and that card
can't be used again.

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 249

Each card's effect is described below.
DECK oF Many THINGS Balance. You can increase one of your ability
Wondrous Item, Legendary scores by 2, to a maximum of 22, provided you also
decrease another one of your ability scores by 2.
Usually found in a box or pouch, this deck contains
You can't decrease an ability that has a score of5
a number of cards made of ivory or vellum, Most
or lower. Alternatively, you can choose not to ad-
(75 percent) of these decks have thirteen cards, but
just your ability scores, in which case this card has
some have twenty-two. Use the appropriate column,
no effect.
of the Deck of Many Things table when randomly
Comet. The next time you enter combat against
determining cards drawn from the deck.
one or more Hostile creatures, you can select one
Before you draw a card, you must declare how
of them as your foe when you roll Initiative. If you
many cards you intend to draw and then draw them
reduce your foe to 0 Hit Points during that combat,
randomly. Any cards drawn in excess of this num-
you have Advantage on Death Saving Throws for 1
ber have no effect. Otherwise, as soon as you draw a
year. If someone else reduces your chosen foe to 0
card from the deck, its magic takes effect. You must
Hit Points or you don't choose a foe, this card has
draw each card no more than I hour after the pre-
no effect.
vious draw. If you fail to draw the chosen number,
Donjon. You disappear and become entombed
the remaining number of cards fly from the deck on
in a state ofsuspended animation in an extradi-
their own and take effect all at once.
mensional sphere. Everything you're wearing and
Once a card is drawn, it disappears. Unless the
carrying disappears with you except for Artifacts,
card is the Fool or Jester, the card reappears in the
which stay behind in the space you occupied when
deck, making it possible to draw the same card
you disappeared. You remain imprisoned until you
twice. (Once the Fool or Jester has left the deck, re-
are found and removed from the sphere. You can't
roll on the table if that card comes up again.)
be located by any Divination magic, but a Wish spell
can reveal the location of your prison. You draw no
Deck OF MANY THINGS
more cards,
14100 14100 Euryale. The card’s medusa-like visage curses you.
(13-Card Deck) (22-Card Deck) Card
You take a -2 penalty to saving throws while cursed
= 01-05 Balance in this way. Only a god or the magic of the Fates
= 06-10
card can end this curse.
Comet
Fates. Reality’s fabric unravels and spins anew, al-
_ n-4 Donjon
lowing you to avoid or erase one event as if it never
01-08 15-18 Euryale happened. You can use the card’s magic as soon
= 19-23 as you draw the card or at any other time before
Fates
you die.
09-16 24-27 Flames
Flames. A powerful devil becomes your enemy.
28-31 Fool ‘The devil seeks your ruin and torments you, savor-

a 32-36 Gem ing your suffering before attempting to slay you.
This enmity lasts until either you or the devil dies.
17-24 37-41 Jester
« ~

25-32 42-46 Key A Question oF ENMITY
33-40 47-51 Knight Two of the cards in the Deck of Many Things can
41-48 52-56 Moon
earn a character the enmity of another being,
With the Flames card, the enmity is overt. The
_ 57-60 Puzzle character should experience the devil's malevo-
49-56 61-64 Rogue lent efforts on multiple occasions. Seeking out
57-64 65-68 Ruin
the fiend shouldn't be a simple task, and the
adventurer should clash with the devil’s allies and
- 69-73 Sage followers a few times before being able to con-
65-72 4-17 Skull front the devil.
73-80 78-82 Star
In the case of the Rogue card, the enmity is
secret and should come from someone thought
81-88 83-87 Sun
to bea friend or an ally. As Dungeon Master, you
= 88-91 Talons should wait for a dramatically appropriate mo-
89-96 92-96 Throne ment to reveal this enmity, leaving the adventurer
guessing who is likely to become a betrayer.
97-00 97-00 Void
~ -

250 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Fool. You have Disadvantage on D20 Tests for the
next 72 hours. Draw another card; this draw doesn’t
count as one of your declared draws. Caaos rao a
Deck
oF Many Tunes
Gem. Twenty-five pieces of jewelry worth 2,000
GP each or fifty gems worth 1,000 GP each appear
at your feet.
Jester. You have Advantage on D20 Tests for the
next 72 hours, or you can draw two additional cards
beyond your declared draws.
Key. A Rare or rarer magic weapon with which
you are proficient appears on your person. The DM
chooses the weapon.
Knight. You gain the service ofa Knight, who
magically appears in an unoccupied space you
choose within 30 feet of yourself. The knight has
the same alignment as you and serves you loyally
until death, believing the two of you have been
drawn together by fate. Work with your DM to cre-
ate a name and backstory for this NPC. The DM can
use a different stat block to represent the knight,
as desired.
Moon. You gain the ability to cast Wish 143 times.
Puzzle. Permanently reduce your Intelligence or
Wisdom by 1d4 + 1 (toa minimum score of 1). You
can draw one additional card beyond your declared
draws.
Rogue. An NPC of the DM's choice becomes Hos-
tile toward you. You don’t know the identity of this
NPC until they or someone else reveals it. Nothing
less than a Wish spell or divine intervention can end
the NPC's hostility toward you.
Ruin, All forms of wealth that you carry or own,
other than magic items, are lost to you. Portable
property vanishes. Businesses, buildings, and land
you own are lost in a way that alters reality the
least. If you have a Bastion (see chapter 8), itis
destroyed by some calamity beyond your control.
Any documentation that proves you should own
something lost to this card also disappears.
Sage. At any time you choose within one year of
drawing this card, you can ask a question in medita-
tion and mentally receive a truthful answer to that
question.
‘Skull. An Avatar of Death (see the accompanying
stat block) appears in an unoccupied space as close
to you as possible. The avatar targets only you with
its attacks, appearing as a ghostly skeleton clad ina
tattered black robe and carrying a spectral scythe.
[he avatar disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points
or you die. If an ally of yours deals damage to the
avatar, that ally summons another Avatar of Death.
The new avatar appears in an unoccupied space as
close to that ally as possible and targets only that
ally with its attacks. You and your allies can each
summon only one avatar as a consequence of this
draw. A creature slain by an avatar can't be restored
to life.

CHAPTER 7| TREASURE 251

AVATAR OF DEATH DEFENDER
Medium Undead, Neutral Evil Weapon (Any Melee Weapon), Legendary (Requires
AC 20 Initiative +3 (13) Attunement)
HP Half the HP maximum of its summoner You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
Speed 60 ft, Fly 60 ft. (hover) made with this magic weapon.
oo sive oo sive oo sive ‘The first time you attack with the weapon on each
Str 16 +3 +3 Dex 16 +3 +3 Conl6 +3 +3 of your turns, you can transfer some or all of the
Int 16 43 43 Wis 16 43 43° CHal6 43 43 ‘weapon's bonus to your Armor Class. For example,
you could reduce the bonus to your attack rolls and
Immunities Necrotic, Poison; Charmed, Exhaustion,
damage rolls to +1 and gain a +2 bonus to Armor
Frightened, Paralyzed, Petrified, Poisoned,
Class. The adjusted bonuses remain in effect until
Unconscious
the start of your next turn, although you must hold
Senses Truesight 60 ft., Passive Perception 13
the weapon to gain a bonus to AC from it.
Languages All languages known to its summoner,
CR None (XP 0; PB equals its summoner’s)

Traits DEMON ARMOR
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Very Rare
Incorporeal Movement. The avatar can move through
(Requires Attunement)
other creatures and objects as if they were Difficult Ter-
rain, It takes 5 (1d10) Force damage ifit ends its turn While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to
inside an object. Armor Class, and you know Abyssal. In addition,
the armor's clawed gauntlets allow your Unarmed
ACTIONS Strikes to deal 148 Slashing damage instead of the
Multiattack. The avatar makes @ number of Reaping usual Bludgeoning damage, and you gain a +1 bonus
Scythe attacks equal to half the summoner's Profi- to the attack and damage rolls of your Unarmed
ciency Bonus (rounded up). Strikes.
Curse. Once you don this cursed armor, you can't,
Reaping Scythe. Melee Attack Roll: Automatic hit, reach
doff it unless you are targeted by a Remove Curse
5 ft. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) Slashing damage plus 4 (148)
spell or similar magic. While wearing the armor,
Necrotic damage.
you have Disadvantage on attack rolls against de-
mons and on saving throws against their spells and
Star. Increase one of your abil y scores by 2, toa special abilities.
maximum of 24.
Sun. A magic item (chosen by the DM) appears on
your person. In addition, you gain 10 Temporary Hit DEMONOMICON oF IcewiLv
Points daily at dawn until you die. Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement)
Talons. Every magic item you wear or carry
This treatise, composed by Iggwily the archmage,
disintegrates. Artifacts in your possession vanish
documents the Abyss's layers and inhabitants and
instead.
is widely regarded as the most thorough and blas-
Throne. You gain proficiency and Expertise in
phemous tome of demonology in the multiverse.
your choice of History, Insight, Intimidation, or Per-
The tome recounts both the oldest and most current
suasion. In addition, you gain rightful ownership of
profanities of the Abyss and demons. Demons have
a small keep somewhere in the world. However, the
attempted to censor the text, and while sections
keep is currently home to one or more monsters,
have been ripped from the book's spine, the general
which must be cleared out before you can claim the
chapters remain, ever revealing demonic secrets.
keep as yours.
Caged behind lines of script roils a secret piece of
Void. Your soul is drawn from your body and
the Abyss itself, which keeps the book up-to-date,
contained in an object in a place of the DM's choice.
no matter how many pages are removed, and it
One or more powerful beings guard the place.
longs to be more than mere reference material.
While your soul is trapped in this way, your body is
Abyssal Lore. You can reference the Demonomicon
inert, ceases aging, and requires no food, air, or wa-
whenever you make an Intelligence check to discern
ter. A Wish spell can't return your soul to your body,
information about demons or a Wisdom (Survival)
but the spell reveals the location ofthe object that
check related to the Abyss. When you do so, you
holds your soul. You draw no more cards.
gain Advantage on the check.
Containment. The first ten pages of the Demonom-
TIS

icon are blank. As a Magic action while holding the

252 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

T

book, you can target a Fiend that you can see that is Spell Charge Cost
trapped within the area of a Magic Circle spell. The
Magic Circle 1
Fiend must succeed on a DC 20 Charisma saving
Magic Jar
throw with Disadvantage or become trapped within
one of the Demonomicon’s blank pages, which fills Planar Ally
with writing detailing the trapped creature’s widely
Planar Binding
known name and depravities. Once used, this action
Plane Shift (to the Abyss only)
can’t be used again until the next dawn.
‘When you finish a Long Rest, if you and the De- Summon Fiend
monomicon are on the same plane of existence, one
Tasha’s Hideous Laughter o
trapped creature within the book can attempt to
possess you. You make a DC 20 Charisma saving Destroying
theDemonomicon. To destroy the
throw. On a failed save, you are possessed by the book, six different demon lords must each tear out
creature, which controls you like a puppet. As a a sixth of the book's pages. If this occurs, the pages
Magic action, the possessing creature can release reappear after 24 hours. Before all those hours pass,
you and appear in the closest unoccupied space to anyone who opens the book's remaining binding is
you. Ona successful save, the Fiend can't try to pos- transported to a nascent layer of the Abyss that lies
sess you again for 7 days (but another Fiend trapped hidden within the book. At the heart of this deadly,
in the book can certainly try). semisentient domain lies a long-lost Artifact, Fraz-
‘When the tome is discovered, it has 1d4 Fiends Urb'luu’s Staff. If the staff is dragged from the pocket
occupying its pages—typically an assortment of plane, the tome is reduced to a mundane and out-of
demons. date copy of the Tome of Zyx, the work that served
Ensnarement. While carrying the book, whenever as the foundation of the Demonomicon of Iggwilv.
you cast Magic Circle naming only Fiends or cast ‘The Tome of Zyx can be destroyed like any ordinary
Planar Binding targeting a Fiend, the spell is cast at book. Once the staff emerges, the demon lord Fraz~
level 9, regardless of what level spell slot you used, if Urb‘luu knows instantly.
any. Additionally, the Fiend has Disadvantage on its
saving throw against the spell.
Fiendish Scourging. While carrying the book,
Demon Anwon
when you make a damage roll for a spell you cast (Pare Armor)
against a Fiend, you use the maximum possible re-
sult instead of rolling.
Random Properties. The Artifact has the following
random properties (see “Artifacts” in this chapter):

+ 2 minor beneficial properties
+ 1 minor detrimental property
+ 1 major detrimental property

Spells. The book has 8 charges and regains 1d8
expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the
book, you can take a Magic action to cast one of the Dereworn

spells (save DC 20) on the following table. The table GGrearsworo)

indicates how many charges you must expend to
cast the spell.

Demonomicon

oF Iecwnw

Dimensionat

Swacnves

Dancow Scaven

(Gresrsworo)
Daacon
Scate Mane

Dreno Hem

DIMENSIONAL SHACKLES Dragon Resistance Dragon _Resistance
Wondrous Item, Rare
Black Acid Gold Fire
You can take a Utilize action to place these shackles
Blue Lightning Green Poison
on a creature that has the Incapacitated condition.
‘The shackles adjust to fit a creature of Small to Brass Fire Red Fire
Large size. The shackles prevent a creature bound Bronze Lightning _ Silver Cold
by them from using any method of extradimen-
Copper Acid White Cold
sional movement, including teleportation or travel
toa different plane of existence. They don't prevent
the creature from passing through an interdimen-
DRAGON SLAYER
nal portal.
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rare
You and any creature you designate when you
use the shackles can take a Utilize action to remove You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
them. Once every 30 days, the bound creature can made with this magic weapon.
make a DC 30 Strength (Athletics) check. On a suc- The weapon deals an extra 346 damage of the
cessful check, the creature breaks free and destroys ‘weapon's type if the target is a Dragon.
the shackles.

Dreap HELM
Dracon ScaLe Malt Wondrous Item, Common
Armor (Scale Mail), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While you're wearing this fearsome steel helm, your
Dragon Scale Mail is made of the scales of one kind eyes glow red and the rest of your face is hidden in
of dragon. Sometimes dragons collect their cast-off shadow.
scales and gift them, Other times, hunters carefully
preserve the hide of
a dead dragon. In either case,
Dragon Scale Mail is highly valued. DRIFTGLOBE
While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to Wondrous Item, Uncommon

Armor Class, you have Advantage on saving throws This small sphere ofthick glass weighs 1 pound. If
against the breath weapons of Dragons, and you you are within 60 feet of it, you can command it
have Resistance to one damage type determined by to emanate light equivalent to that ofthe Light or
the kind of dragon that provided the scales (see the Daylight spell (your choice). Once used, the Daylight
accompanying table). effect can't be used again until the next dawn,
Additionally, you can focus your senses as a You can issue another command as a Magic ac-
Magic action to discern the distance and direction tion to make the illuminated globe rise into the air
to the closest dragon within 30 miles ofyourself and float no more than 5 feet off the ground. The
that is of the same type as the armor. This action globe hovers in this way until you or another crea
can't be used again until the next dawn. ture grasps it. If you move more than 60 feet from

254 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

vyi.
—

las
Disaopeanance

Dust oF Sweszine

Ano Cronin

Drirrevone

the hovering globe, it follows you until itis within
60 feet of you. It takes the shortest route to do so.
If prevented from moving, the globe sinks gently
to the ground and becomes inactive, and its light
winks out.

Dust oF DISAPPEARANCE Constitution saving throw, taking 10d6 Necrotic
Wondrous Item, Uncommon damage on a failed save or half as much damage on
‘This powder resembles fine sand. There is enough a successful one.
of it for one use. When you take a Utilize action to
throw the dust into the air, you and each creature
and object within a 10-foot Emanation originating Dust OF SNEEZING AND CHOKING
from you have the Invisible condition for 2d4 min- Wondrous Item, Uncommon
utes. The duration is the same for all subjects, and Found in a small container, this powder resembles
the dust is consumed when its magic takes effect. Dust of Disappearance, and Identify reveals it to be
Immediately after an affected creature makes an at- such. There is enough of it for one use.
tack roll, deals damage, or casts a spell, the Invisible Asa Utilize action, you can throw the dust into
condition ends for that creature. the air, forcing yourself and every creature in a 30-
foot Emanation originating from you to make a DC
15 Constitution saving throw. Constructs, Elemen-
Dust or DryNEss tals, Oozes, Plants, and Undead succeed on the save
Wondrous Item, Uncommon automatically.
This smalll packet contains 1d6 + 4 pinches of dust. On a failed save, a creature begins sneezing un-
Asa Utilize action, you can sprinkle a pinch ofthe controllably; it has the Incapacitated condition and
dust over water, turning up to a 15-foot Cube of is suffocating. The creature repeats the save at the
water into one marble-sized pellet, which floats or end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
rests near where the dust was sprinkled. The pellet’s ona success. The effect also ends on any creature
weight is negligible, A creature can take a Utilize targeted by a Lesser Restoration spell.
action to smash the pellet against a hard surface,
causing the pellet to shatter and release the water
the dust absorbed. Doing so destroys the pellet and DwaRVEN PLATE
ends its magic. Armor (Half Plate or Plate Armor), Very Rare
As a Utilize action, you can sprinkle a pinch of While wearing this armor, you gain a +2 bonus to
the dust on an Elemental within 5 feet of yourself Armor Class. In addition, if an effect moves you
that is composed mostly of water (such as a Water against your will along the ground, you can take a
Elemental or a Water Weird). Such a creature Reaction to reduce the distance you are moved by
exposed to a pinch ofthe dust makes a DC 13 up to 10 feet.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 255

Erasers
Coan

DWARVEN THROWER
Weapon (Warhammer), Very Rare (Requires
Attunement by a Dwarf
or a Creature Attuned to a Belt
of Dwarvenkind)

Euven Cuan You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
made with this magic weapon. It has the Thrown
property with a normal range of 20 feet and a long
range of 60 feet. When you hit with a ranged at-
tack using this weapon, it deals an extra 1d8 Force
damage, or an extra 248 Force damage if the target
is a Giant. Immediately after hitting or
weapon flies back to your hand.

EAR Horn OF HEARING
Wondrous Item, Common

While held up to your ear, this horn suppresses the
effects of the Deafened condition on you.

EPREETI BOTTLE
Wondrous Item, Very Rare

When you take a Magic action to remove the stop-
per of this painted brass bottle, a cloud of thick
smoke flows out of it. At the end of your turn, the
smoke disappears with a flash of harmless fire, and
an Efreeti appears in an unoccupied space within
30 feet of you.
The first time the bottle is opened, the DM rolls
on the following table to determine what happens.

1d10 Effect

1 The efreeti attacks you. After fighting for 5
rounds, the efreeti disappears, and the bottle
loses its magic.
Dwanven
Twrower 2-9 The efreeti understands your languages
and obeys your commands for 1 hour, after
which it returns to the bottle, and a new
Eraceri stopper contains it. The stopper can't be re
Borne
moved for 24 hours. The next two times the
bottle is opened, the same effect occurs. If
the bottle is opened a fourth time, the efreeti
escapes and disappears, and the bottle loses
its magic.

10 The efreeti understands your languages and
can cast Wish once foryou. It disappears
when it grants the wish or after 1 hour, and
the bottle loses its magic.

256 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

EFREETI CHAIN EneERcy Bow
‘Armor (Chain Mail or Chain Shirt), Legendary (Requires Weapon (Longbow or Shorthow), Very Rare (Requires
Attunement) Attunement)
While wearing this armor, you gain a +3 bonus to You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
Armor Class, you have Immunity to Fire damage, made with this magic weapon, which has no string.

re ee
and you know Primordial. In addition, you can Each time you pull your arm back in a firing motion,
stand on and move across molten rock as if it were a magical arrow made of golden energy appears
solid ground, nocked and ready to fire. An arrow produced by
this weapon deals Force damage instead of Piere-
ing damage on a hit, and it disappears after it hits
ELEMENTAL GEM
or misses its target. Until it disappears, the arrow
Wondrous Item, Uncommon emits Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light
This gem contains a mote of elemental energy. for an additional 20 feet.
When you take a Utilize action to break the gem, an This weapon has the following additional
elemental is summoned (see the Monster Manual for properties.
its stat block), and the gem ceases to be magical. The Arrow of Restraint. Whenever you use t
elemental appears in an unoccupied space as close weapon to make a ranged attack against a creature,
to the broken gem as possible, understands your you can try to restrain the target instead of deal-
languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn ing damage to it. If the arrow hits, the target must
immediately after you on your Initiative count. The succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or have
elemental disappears after1 hour, when it dies, or the Restrained condition for1 minute. As an action,
when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The type of a creature Restrained by an arrow can make a DC
gem determines the elemental, as shown in the fol-
lowing table.

Gem ‘Summoned Elemental

Blue sapphire Air Elemental
Emerald Water Elemental
Red corundum Fire Elemental Hane omaws sis

Eneaey Bow.
Yellow diamond Earth Elemental

Evoxir OF HEALTH
Potion, Rare

When you drink this potion, you are cured of all
magical contagions. In addition, the following con-
ditions end on you: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed,
and Poisoned.
‘The clear, red liquid has tiny bubbles oflight in it,

ELVEN CHAIN
Armor (Chain Mail or Chain Shirt), Rare

You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class while you wear
this armor. You are considered trained with this
armor even if you lack training with Medium or
Heavy armor.

ENDURING SPELLBOOK
Wondrous Item, Common

This spellbook, along with anything written on its
pages, can't be damaged by fire or water. In addi-
tion, the spellbook doesn't deteriorate with age.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 257

20 Strength (Athletics) check to try to break the charges and regains 1d6 expended charges daily at
restraint, ending the effect on itself on a successful dawn. While holding the staff, you can expend 1
check. charge to cast its spell. If you expend the staff's last
Arrow of Transport. As a Magic action, you can charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the staff loses its proper-
fire one energy arrow from this weapon at a target ties and becomes a nonmagical Quarterstaff.
you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The target The level ofthe spell bound into the staff deter-
can be either a willing Medium or smaller creature mines the spell’s saving throw DC and attack bonus,
or an object that isn't being worn or carried, pro- as well as the staff’s rarity, as shown in the follow-
vided the object is small enough to fit inside a 5-foot ing table.
Cube. The arrow teleports the target to an unoccu-
Spell Level. Rarity Save DC Attack Bonus
pied space you can see within 10 feet of you.
Energy Ladder. As a Magic action, you can loose a Cantrip Uncommon 13 +

flurry of energy arrows from this weapon at a wall 1 Uncommon 3 +5
up to 60 feet away from yourself. The arrows be-
2 Rare B +5
come glowing rungs that stick out of the wall, form-
ing a magical ladder up to 60 feet long on the wall. 3 Rare 15 +7

This ladder lasts for 1 minute before disappearing. 4 Very Rare 15 7

5 Very Rare ” +9

ENSPELLED ARMOR 6 Legendary v7 +9
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rarity Varies 7 Legendary 18 +10
(Requires Attunement)
8 Legendary 8 +10
Bound into this armor is a spell of level 8 or lower.
The spell is determined when the armor is created
and must belong to the Abjuration or Illusion school ENSPELLED WEAPON
of magic. The armor has 6 charges and regains 146
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rarity Varies
expended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the
(Requires Attunement)
armor, you can expend I charge to cast its spell.
The level of the spell bound into the armor deter-
Bound into this weapon is a spell of level 8 or lower.
mines the spell’s saving throw DC and attack bonus,
‘The spell is determined when the weapon is created
and must belong to the Conjuration, Divination,
as well as the armor’s rarity, as shown in the follow-
Evocation, Necromancy, or Transmutation school
ing table.
of magic. The weapon has 6 charges and regains 146
Spell Level Rarity Save DC Attack Bonus expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the
Cantrip Uncommon 13. +5 ‘weapon, you can expend I charge to cast its spell.
The level of the spell bound into the weapon de-
1 Uncommon 13 +5
termines the spell’s saving throw DC and attack bo-
2 Rare B +5 nus, as well as the weapon's rarity, as shown in the
3 Rare 15 47 following table.

4 Very Rare 15 7 Spell Level Rarity Save DC Attack Bonus
5 Very Rare v 49 Cantrip Uncommon 13, 45

6 Legendary v 49 1 Uncommon 3 +5

7 Legendary 1B +10 2 Rare B +5

8 Legendary 18 +10 3 Rare 15. +7
4 Very Rare 15 47

5 Very Rare V7 49
ENSPELLED STAFF
Staff, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement bya 6 Legendary W +9
Spellcaster) 7 Legendary 8 +10
Bound into this staffs a spell of level 8 or lower. 8 Legendary B +10
The spell is determined when the staff is created
and can be of any school of magic. The staff has 6

258 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Ersatz EVE
Wondrous Item, Common

‘This magical eye replaces a real one that was lost
or removed. While the Ersatz Eye is embedded in
your eye socket, you can see through the tiny orb as
though it were your natural eye. You can insert or
remove the Ersatz Bye as a Magic action, and it can't
be removed against your will while you are alive.

EVERSMOKING BOTTLE Everssoxing
Borne
Wondrous Item, Uncommon

‘As a Magic action, you can open or close this bottle,
Opening the bottle causes thick smoke to billow
out, forming a cloud that fills a 60-foot Emanation
originating from the bottle. The area within the
smoke is Heavily Obscured.
Each minute the bottle remains open, the size of
the Emanation increases by 10 feet until it reaches
its maximum size of 120 feet.
Closing the bottle causes the cloud to become
fixed in place until it disperses after 10 minutes. A
strong wind (such as that created by the Gust of
Wind spell) disperses the cloud after I minute,

EXECUTIONER’S AXE
Weapon (Battleaxe, Greataxe, Halberd, or Handaxe), Random Properties of the Eye and Hand. The Eye of
Very Rare Vecna and the Hand of Vecna each have the following
You gain a «1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls random properties (see “Artifacts” in this chapter):

made with this magic weapon. + Lminor beneficial property
Any Humanoid you hit with the weapon takes an + Lmajor beneficial property
extra 2d6 Slashing damage, and you gain Tempo- + 1 minor detrimental property
rary Hit Points equal to the extra damage dealt.
Attuning to the Eye. To attune to the eye, you must
press it into your empty socket. The eye grafts itself

EYE AND HAND OF VECNA to your head and remains there until you die. If the
eye is ever removed, you die,
Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement)
Properties of the Eye. While you are attuned to the
Vecna was a mighty wizard who, through magic
eye, your alignment is Neutral Evil, and you gain
and conquest, forged a terrible empire. For all his
the following benefits:
power, however, Vecna feared death and took steps
to prevent his demise by becoming a lich. Truesight. You have Truesight out to 240 feet.
A treacherous lieutenant named Kas brought Spellcasting. The eye has 8 charges and regains 1d4
+4 expended charges daily at dawn. You can cast
Vecna’s rule to an end in a terrible battle. Of Veena,
all that remained were one hand and one eye, grisly a spell on the Bye of Vecna Spells table from the
Artifacts that still seek to work Vecna’s will in eye (save DC 18). The table indicates how many
the world. charges you must expend to cast the spell. Each
‘The Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Veena are sep- ime you cast a spell from the eye, there is a 5 per-
arate Artifacts that might be found together or cent chance that Vecna tears your soul from your
separately. The eye looks like a bloodshot organ body, devours it, and then takes control of the
torn free from the socket. The hand is a shriveled body like a puppet. If that happens, you become
left extremity. an NPC under the DM's control.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 259

Iey Touch. Any melee spell attack you make with
the hand and any melee attack made with a
‘weapon held by it deals an extra 248 Cold damage
on a hit.
Spelicasting. The hand has 8 charges and regains
1d4 + 4 expended charges daily at dawn. You can
cast a spell on the Hand of Vecna Spells table from
the hand (save DC 18). The table indicates how
many charges you must expend to cast the spell.
Each time you cast a spell from it, the hand casts
Suggestion on you (save DC 18; no Concentration
required), demanding that you commit an evil
act. The hand might have a specific act in mind or
leave it up to you.

HaNp oF VECNA SPELLS
Spell Charge Cost
Finger of Death 5

Sleep 1
Slow 2

Teleport 3
Eve
or Veena

Properties of the Eye and Hand, While attuned to
both the hand and eye, you gain the following addi-
tional benefits:

Eve oF VECNA SPELLS Danger Sense. You have Advantage on Initiative
Spell Charge Cost rolls.

Clairvoyance 2 Necrotic Reduction. As a Magic action, you can
target one creature you can see within 5 feet of
Crown of Madness 1 yourself. The target makes a DC 18 Constitution
Disintegrate 4 saving throw, taking 746 Necrotic damage on a
failed save or half
as much damage on a successful
Dominate Monster 5
one. A creature reduced to 0 Hit Points by this
Eyebite 4 damage is transformed into green slime (see chap-
ter 3) that covers the ground in its space, each
X-ray Vision. You can take a Magic action to gain
5-foot square of slime representing
a separate
X-ray vision with a range of 30 feet for I minute.
patch. Nonmagical objects worn or carried by the
To you, solid objects within that radius appear
target that are made of metal or organic material
transparent and don't prevent light from passing
are destroyed by the slime.
through themselves. The vision can penetrate 1
Poison Immunity. You have Immunity to Poison
foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, or up to 3
damage and the Poisoned condition.
feet of wood or dirt. Thicker substances block the
Regeneration. If you start your turn with at least1
vision, as does a thin sheet of lead.
Hit Point, you regain 1d10 Hit Points.
Attuning to the Hand. To attune to the hand, you Wish. You can cast Wish. Once used, this property
must press it against the stump where your left can't be used again until 30 days have passed.
hand was. The hand grafts itself to your arm and
Destroying the Eye and Hand. If the Eye of Vecna
becomes a functioning appendage. If the hand is,
and the Hand of Vecna are both attached to the same
ever removed, you die.
creature and that creature is slain by the Sword of
Properties of the Hand. When you are attuned to
Kas, both the eye and the hand burst into flame,
the hand, your alignment is Neutral Evil, and you
turn to ash, and are destroyed. Any other attempt
gain the following benefits:
to destroy the eye or hand seems to work, but the
Great Strength. Your Strength becomes 20 unless Artifact reappears in one of Vecna's many hidden
itis already 20 or higher. vaults, where it waits to be rediscovered.

260 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Eves oF
Carmine

Eyes oF CHARMING
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)

These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. They have 3
charges. While wearing them, you can expend 1 or
more charges to cast Charm Person (save DC 13). For
1 charge, you cast the level1 version of the spell. You
increase the spell’s level by one for each additional
charge you expend. The lenses regain all expended
charges daily at dawn.

The creature exists fora duration specific to each
EYES OF MINUTE SEEING
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
figurine. At the end of the duration, the creature
reverts to its figurine form. It reverts to a figurine
These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. While wear-
early if its creature form drops to 0 Hit Points or
ing them, your vision improves significantly out to a
if you take a Magic action while touching the crea-
range of I foot, granting you Darkvision within that ture to make it revert to figurine form. When the
range and Advantage on Intelligence (Investigation)
creature becomes a figurine again, its property can't
checks made to examine something within that
be used again until a certain amount of time has
range.
passed, as specified in the figurine’s description.
Bronze Griffon (Rare). This bronze statuette is ofa
griffon rampant. It can become a Griffon for up to 6
EYES OF THE EAGLE
hours. Once it has been used, it can’t be used again
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
until 5 days have passed.
‘These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. While wear- Ebony Fly (Rare). This ebony statuette, carved in
ing them, you have Advantage on Wisdom (Per- the likeness ofa horsefly, can become a Giant Fly
ception) checks that rely on sight. In conditions of (see the accompanying stat block) for up to 12 hours
clear visibility, you can make out details of even and can be ridden as a mount. Once it has been
extremely distant creatures and objects as small as used, it can't be used again until 2 days have passed.
2 feet across. Golden Lions (Rare). These gold statuettes of lions
are always created in pairs. You can use one fig
urine or both simultaneously. Each can become a
Ficurine or Wonprous PowER Lion for up to I hour. Once a lion has been used, it
Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies can't be used again until 7 days have passed.
A Figurine of Wondrous Power is a statuette small
enough to fit in a pocket. If you take a Magic ac- Giant FLy |
tion to throw the figurine to a point on the ground
within 60 feet of yourself, the figurine becomes a
ach Initiative +1 (11)
living creature specified in the figurine's description
HP 19 (3d10
+ 3)
below. If the space where the creature would appear
Speed
30 ft, Fly 60 ft.
is occupied by other creatures or objects, or if there
isn't enough space for the creature, the figurine
doesn't become a creature.
Se 1442 42 Dex13 441 41 Cont3 41 1
‘The creature is Friendly to you and your allies. Int 2-4 -4 Wis 10 +0 40 CHa3 -4 -4

It understands your languages, obeys your com-
Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10
mands, and takes its turn immediately after you on Languages None
your Initiative count. If you issue no commands, the CRO (XP 0; PB +2)
creature defends itself but takes no other actions.

CHAPTER7|TREASURE 261

Ficuaine oF
Fiouae oF
Wonorous Powen Wononous Power

(Manace Eveenanr)
(Onvx Doe)

Frounine or

Wononoue Power
(Ossioian Srexo)

Fieuaine or Wononous
Power (Enon Fux)

Ivory Goats (Rare). These ivory statuettes of goats Goat of Travail. This figurine can become a Giant
are always created in sets of three. Each goat looks Goat for up to 3 hours. Once it has been used, i
unique and functions differently from the others. can't be used again until 30 days have passed.
Their properties are as follows:
Marble Elephant (Rare). This marble statuette
Goat of Terror. This figurine can become a Giant resembles a trumpeting elephant. It can become an
Goat for up to 3 hours. The goat can't attack, but Elephant for up to 24 hours. Once it has been used,
you can (harmlessly) remove its horns and use it can’t be used again until 7 days have passed.
them as weapons. One horn becomes a #! Lance, Obsidian Steed (Very Rare). This polished obsidian
and the other becomes a +2 Longsword. Removing horse can become a Nightmare for up to 24 hours.
a horn requires a Magic action, and the weapons The nightmare fights only to defend itself. Once it
disappear and the horns return when the goat has been used, it can't be used again until 5 days
reverts to figurine form. While you ride the goat, have passed.
any Hostile creature that starts its turn within The figurine has a 10 percent chance each time
a 30-foot Emanation originating from the goat you use it to ignore your orders, including a com-
must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or mand to revert to figurine form. If you mount the
have the Frightened condition for 1 minute, until nightmare while it is ignoring your orders, you
you are no longer riding the goat, or until the goat and the nightmare are instantly transported toa
reverts to figurine form. The Frightened creature random location on the plane of Hades, where the
repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, nightmare reverts to figurine form.
ending the effect on itself on a success. Once it Onyx Dog (Rare). This onyx statuette ofa dog can
succeeds on the save, a creature is immune to this become a Mastiff for up to 6 hours. The mastiff has
effect for the next 24 hours. Once the figurine has. an Intelligence of 8 and can speak Common. It also
been used, it can’t be used again until 15 days have has Blindsight with a range of 60 feet. Once it has
passed, been used, it can't be used again until 7 days have
Goat of Traveling. This figurine can become a passed,
Large goat with the same statistics as a Riding Serpentine Owl (Rare). This serpentine statuette of
Horse. It has 24 charges, and each hour or por- an owl can become a Giant Owl for up to 8 hours.
tion thereof
it spends in goat form costs I charge. The owl can communicate telepathically with you at
While it has charges, you can use it as often as you any range if you and it are on the same plane of ex-
wish, When it runs out of charges, it reverts to a fence. Once it has been used, it can’t be used again
figurine and can't be used again until 7 days have until 2 days have passed.
passed, when it regains all expended charges.

262 CHAPTER
7 | TREASURE

Figurines oF

Wonorous Power
(ivory Goats) Fiame Toncve
(Lonesworo)
“©

Fiouaine or
Wowonous Power
(Senvenrine Owe)

Frost Beano
(Seinmran)

Silver Raven (Uncommon). This silver statuette
ofa raven can become a Raven for up to 12 hours.
Third Command Word. The Folding Boat folds back
Once it has been used, it can’t be used again until 2
into a box if no creatures are aboard. Any objects
days have passed. While in raven form, the figurine
in the vessel that can't fit inside the box remain
grants you the ability to cast Animal Messenger on it.
outside the box as it folds. Any objects in the ves-
sel that can fit inside the box do so.
FLAME TONGUE ‘When the box becomes a vessel, its weight becomes
Weapon (Any Melee Weapon), Rare (Requires that of a normal vessel its size, and anything that
Attunement) was stored in the box remains in the boat.
r
Statistics for the Rowboat and Keelboat appeain
While holding this magic weapon, you can take a
Bonus Action and use a command word to cause the Player’s Handbook. Ifeither vessel is reduced to 0
flames to engulf the damage-dealing part of the Hit Points, the Folding Boat is destroyed.
weapon. These flames shed Bright Light in a 40-
foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 40 feet.
While the weapon is ablaze, it deals an extra 2d6 Frost BRAND
Fire damage on a hit. The flames last until you take Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier,
a Bonus Action to issue the command again or until Scimitar, or Shortsword), Very Rare (Requires
you drop, stow, or sheathe the weapon. Attunement)
‘When you hit with an attack roll using this magic
weapon, the target takes an extra 1d6 Cold damage.
Foupinc Boat Inaddition, while you hold the weapon, you have
Wondrous Item, Rare Resistance to Fire damage.
This object appears as a wooden box that measures In freezing temperatures, the weapon sheds
12 inches long, 6 inches wide, and 6 inches deep. Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for
It weighs 4 pounds and floats. It can be opened to an additional 10 feet.
store items inside. This item also has three com- ‘When you draw this weapon, you can extinguish
mand words, each requiring a Magic action to use: all nonmagical flames within 30 feet of yourself.
Once used, this property can't be used again for
First Command Word. The box unfolds into a Thour.
Rowboat.
Second Command Word. The box unfolds into a
Keelboat.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

GauNTLETS OF OGRE POWER Gen or SEEING
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
Your Strength is 19 while you wear these gauntlets. This gem has 3 charges. As a Magic action, you can
‘They have no effect on you if your Strength is 19 or expend 1 charge. For the next 10 minutes, you have
higher without them. ‘Truesight out to 120 feet when you peer through
the gem.
The gem regains 1d3 expended charges daily at
Gem OF BRIGHTNESS dawn.
Wondrous Item, Uncommon

This prism has 50 charges. While you are holding
it, you can take a Magic action and use one of three GIANT SLAYER
command words to cause one of the following Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rare
effect You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls

First Command Word. The gem sheds Bright Light made with this magic weapon.
in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi- When you hit a Giant with this weapon, the Giant
tional 30 feet. This effect doesn't expend a charge. takes an extra 246 damage of the weapon's type and

It lasts until you take a Bonus Action to repeat the must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or

command word or until you use another function have the Prone condition.
of the gem.
Second Command Word. You expend I charge and
GLAaMoureED StupDED LEATHER
cause the gem to fire a brilliant beam of light at,
Armor (Studded Leather Armor), Rare
one creature you can see within 60 feet of your-
self. The creature must succeed on a DC 15 Con- While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to
stitution saving throw or have the Blinded condi- Armor Class. You can also take a Bonus Action to
tion for1 minute. The creature repeats the save at cause the armor to assume the appearance ofa nor-
the end ofeach ofits turns, ending the effect on mal set of clothing or some other kind of armor. You
itself
on a success. decide what it looks like—including color, style, and
‘Third Command Word. You expend 5 charges and accessories—but the armor retains its normal bulk
cause the gem to flare with intense light in a 30- and weight. The illusory appearance lasts until you
foot Cone. Each creature in the Cone makes a sav- use this property again or doff the armor.
ing throw as if struck by the beam created with
the second command word.

‘When all of the gems charges are expended, the Gem or
gem becomes a nonmagical jewel worth 50 GP. Baiowrness

Guoves or
Missive Swaning

Gaunriers
oF
Cane Power

Gem oF
Seine

264 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Goves oF MIssILz SNARING Hac Eye
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) Wondrous Item, Uncommon
If you're hit by an attack roll made with a Ranged A Hag Bye has 3 charges. While wearing or holding
or Thrown weapon while wearing these gloves, this item, you can expend 1 charge to cast Darkvision
you can take a Reaction to reduce the damage by (targeting yourself only) or See Invisibility. The Hag
1d10 plus your Dexterity modifier if you have a free Eye regains all expended charges daily at dawn.
hand. If you reduce the damage to 0, you can catch Coven Sensor. The Hag Eye is usually entrusted to
the ammunition or weapon if itis small enough for a hag’s minion for safekeeping and transport. As a
you to hold in that hand. Magic action, a hag who belongs to the coven that
created the Hag Bye can see what the Hag Eye sees if
the hag and the Hag Eye are on the same plane of ex-
GLoves OF SWIMMING AND CLIMBING istence. This effect lasts as long as the hag maintains
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) Concentration. Multiple hags in the coven can see
While wearing these gloves, you have a Climb Speed through the Hag Eye simultaneously.
and a Swim Speed equal to your Speed, and you Creating a Hag Eye. Only a hag coven can craft
gain a +5 bonus to Strength (Athletics) checks made this item, which is made from a real eye coated in
to climb or swim, varnish and often fitted to a pendant or another
wearable item. A hag coven can have only one Hag
Eye at a time, and creating a new one requires all
Groves or THIEVERY three members of the coven to perform a special
Wondrous Item, Uncommon rite. This rite takes 1 hour, and the hags can't per-

These gloves are imperceptible while worn. While
formit if one or more of them has the Incapacitated
condition. If the hags take any other actions during
wearing them, you gain a +5 bonus to Dexterity
this rite, the rite fails and ends.

Goce.ss or NiGHT HAMMER OF THUNDERBOLTS
Weapon (Maul or Warhammer), Legendary (Requires
Wondrous item, Uncommon
Attunement)
While wearing these dark lenses, you have Darkvi-
You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
sion out to 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision,
made with this magic weapon.
wearing the goggles increases its range by 60 feet.
‘The weapon has 5 charges. You can expend 1
charge and make a ranged attack with the weapon,
hurling it as if it had the Thrown property with a
normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet.
Hasner oF

Twunoeanorrs

Groves
oF
Tuevery

Goastes
oF
Nowe

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 265

If the attack hits, the weapon unleashes a thunder- 14100. Effect
clap audible out to 300 feet. The target and every 450 vou Saat uo Spal Gaara
creature within 30 feet of it other than you must
jollioa1d10; onlay Enlarge/Redies (ena
succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving throw or Fen eRe
have the Stunned condition until the end of your soi ids Erie Reduce (reditcs ef;
next turn. Immediately after hitting
or missing, the feetionia 3: eerie iteona & reba ov.
weapon flies back to your hand. The weapon regains 5, Gust of Wind; on a 6, invisibility (cast
1d4 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. ‘on yourself); on a 7, Lightning Bolt; on an 8,
Giant's Bane. While you are attuned to the Phantasmal Force; on a 9, Polymorph; on a
weapon and wearing either a Belt of Giant Strength 10, Stinking Cloud,

or Gauntlets of Ogre Power to which you are also at- 51-55 You have the Stunned condition until the
tuned, you gain the following benefits
end of your next turn, believing something
Giants’ Bane. When you roll a 20 on the d20 for an awesome just happened
attack roll made with this weapon against a Giant, 56 60 harmless swarm of butterflies fils a 10-
the creature must succeed on a DC 17 Constitu- {001 Cube within 40 feet of yourcelf The
tion saving throw or die.
Might of Giants. The Strength score bestowed by
swarm disperses after1 minute.
your Belt of Giant Strength or Gauntlets of Ogre 61-65 You pull a nonmagical object out of the hat.
Power increases by 4, to a maximum of30. Roll 1d4 to determine the object: on a, a
vial of Acid; on a2, a flask ofAlchemist's
Fire; on a 3, a Crowbar; on a 4, a lit Torch,
Hat oF Discuise
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)

While wearing this hat, you can cast the Disguise
Self spell. The spell ends if the hat is removed,

Har oF Many SrELLs
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement bya
Wizard)

This pointed hat has the following properties.
Spellcasting Focus. While holding the hat, you can
use it as a Spellcasting Focus for your Wizard spells.
Any spell you cast using the hat gains a special So-
matic component: you must reach into the hat and
“pull” the spell out ofit.
Unknown Spell. While holding the hat, you can
try to cast a level Ie spell you don’t know. The spell
must be on the Wizard spell list, it must be of a level
you can cast, and it can't have Material components
costing more than 1,000 GP. Once you decide on
the spell, you must expend a spell slot ofthe spell’s
level. Then, to determine whether you cast the spell,
make an Intelligence (Arcana) check (DC 10 plus
the spell’s level). On a successful check, you cast the
spell using its normal casting time, and you can't
use this property again until you finish a Short or
Long Rest. Ona failed check, you fail to cast the
spell and a random effect occurs instead, deter-
mined by rolling on the following table.
Any spell you cast from the hat uses your spell
save DC and spell attack bonus.

USING Mis Har oF Man Specs.
CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

1d100_ Effect

66-70 You suffer a bout of “magic sickness” and Har oF VERMIN
have the Poisoned condition for1 hour. Wondrous Item, Common

71-75 You have the Petrified condition until the This hat has 3 charges. While holding the hat, you
end of your next turn.
can take a Magic action to expend I charge and
summon your choice ofa Bat, a Frog, or a Rat. The
76-80 You pull a nonmagical object out of the summoned creature magically appears in the hat
hat. Roll 1d4 to determine the object: on and tries to get away from you as quickly as pos-
a, a Dagger; on a2, a Rope with a Grap- sible. The creature is Indifferent toward you and
pling Hook tied to one end; on a 3, a bag of other creatures, and it isn't under your control.
Caltrops; on a 4, a gem worth 50 GP. It behaves as an ordinary creature ofits kind and
81-85 A creature appears in an unoccupied space
disappears after1 hour or when it drops to 0 Hit
Points. The hat regains all expended charges daily
as close to you as possible. The creature
at dawn.
isn't under your control and acts as it nor-
mally would, and it disappears after 1 hour
or when it drops to 0 Hit Points. Roll 1d4 Hat oF WizARDRY
to determine the creature: on a 1, a Camel; Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement bya
on a2, a Constrictor Snake; on a 3, an Ele- Wizard)
phant; on a 4, a Mule. This cone-shaped hat is adorned with moons and
86-90 A Hostile Swarm ofBats flies out of the hat, stars. While you are wearing it, you gain the follow-
‘occupies your space, and attacks you. ing benefits.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use the hat as a Spell-
91-95 A vertical, 10-foot-diameter, two-way portal
casting Focus for your Wizard spells.
to another plane of existence opens in an
Unknown Spell. As a Magic action, you can try
unoccupied space within 30 feet of you and
to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The cantrip
remains open until the end of your next must be on the Wizard spell list and have a casting
turn, The DM determines where it leads. time of
an action, and you make a DC 10 Intelli-
96-00 You pull a magic item out ofthe hat. Roll gence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you
1d6 to determine the item's rari na 1-3, cast the spell. On a failed check, the spell fails, and
the action used to cast the spell is wasted. In either
Common; on a 4-5, Uncommon; on a 6,
case, you can’t use this property again until you fin-
Rare. The DM chooses the item, which dis-
ish a Long Rest.
appears after 1 hour ifit’s not consumed or
destroyed before then.

har or

Wizanony

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 267

Heavnano oF

Inreticer
Hew oF

Heem oF Meum oF Comprewenoine
Brictance

HEADBAND OF INTELLECT
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)

Your Intelligence is 19 while you wear this head- Fireball (fire opal), Prismatic Spray (diamond), or Wall
band. It has no effect on you if your Intelligence is ofFire (ruby). The gem is destroyed when the spell is

19 or higher without it. cast and disappears from the helm.
Taking Fire Damage. Roll 1420 if you are wearing
the helm and take Fire damage as a result of failing

HELM OF BRILLIANCE a saving throw against a spell. On a roll of 1, the

Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) helm emits beams oflight from its remaining gems
and is then destroyed. Each creature within a 60-
This helm is set with 1d10 diamonds, 2d10 rubies,
foot Emanation originating from you must succeed
3di0 fire opals, and 4d10 opals. Any gem pried from
ona DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or be struck by a
the helm crumbles to dust. When all the gems are
beam, taking Radiant damage equal to the number
removed or destroyed, the helm loses its magic.
of gems in the helm.
You gain the following benefits while wearing the
helm.
Diamond Light. As long as it has at least one
HELM oF COMPREHENDING LANGUAGES
diamond, the helm emits a 30-foot Emanation.
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
When at least one Undead is within that area, the
Emanation is filled While wearing this helm, you can cast Comprehend
with Dim Light. Any Undead
that starts its turn in that area takes 1d6 Radiant Languages from it.
damage,
Fire Opal Flames. As long as the helm has at least
HELM oF TELEPATHY
one fire opal, you can take a Magic action to cause
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
one weapon you are holding to burst into flames.

‘The flames emit Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and While wearing this helm, you have telepathy with a
Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. The flames are range of 30 feet, and you can cast Detect Thoughts or
harmless to you and the weapon. When you hit with Suggestion (save DC 13) from the helm. Once either
an attack using the blazing weapon, the target takes spell is cast from the helm, that spell can't be cast
an extra 146 Fire damage. The flames last until you from it again until the next dawn,
take a Bonus Action to extinguish them or until you
drop or stow the weapon.
Ruby Resistance. As long as the helm has at least HELM OF TELEPORTATION
one ruby, you have Resistance to Fire damage. Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
Spells. You can cast one of the following spells This helm has 3 charges. While wearing it, you can
(ave DC 18), using one ofthe helm’s gems of the expend 1 charge to cast Teleport from it. The helm
specified type as a component: Daylight (opal), regains Id3 expended charges daily at dawn.

268 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Hewsno’s Hanoy Havensack Be

(Grearswono)

Tecerorrarion

Hewarp’s HANDY HAVERSACK
Wondrous Item, Rare

This backpack has a central pouch and two side
pouches, each of which is an extradimensional
space. Each side pouch can hold up to 200 pounds
of material, not exceeding a volume of 25 cubic feet.
The central pouch can hold up to 500 pounds of
material, not exceedinga volume of 64 cubic feet.
Hewarp's Hanpy Spice Poucy
‘The haversack always weighs 5 pounds, regardless
Wondrous Item, Common
ofits contents.
Retrieving an item from the haversack requires This belt pouch appears empty and has 10 charges.
a Utilize action or a Bonus Action (your choice). While holding the pouch, you can take a Magic ac-

When you reach into the haversack for a specific tion to expend I charge, name any nonmagical food
item, the item is always magically on top. seasoning (such as salt, pepper, saffron, or cilantro),

If any of its pouches is overloaded, pierced, or and remove a pinch of the desired seasoning from
torn, the haversack ruptures and is destroyed. If the the pouch. A pinch is enough to season a single
haversack is destroyed, its contents are lost forever, meal. The pouch regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges
although an Artifact always turns up again some- daily at dawn.
where. If the haversack is turned inside out, its con-
forth unharmed, and the haversack must
Hoy AVENGER
be put right before it can be used again.
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Legendary (Requires
Each pouch of the haversack holds enough air for
10 minutes of breathing, divided by the number of Attunement by a Paladin)
breathing creatures inside. You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage
Placing the haversack inside an extradimensional rolls made with this magic weapon. When you hit a
space created by a Bag of Holding, Portable Hole, Fiend or an Undead with it, that creature takes an
or similar item instantly destroys both items and extra 2410 Radiant damage.
opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate originates While you hold the drawn weapon, it creates a
where the one item was placed inside the other. Any 10-foot Emanation originating from you. You and
creature within 10 feet of the gate and not behind all creatures Friendly to you in the Emanation have
Total Cover is sucked through it and deposited in Advantage on saving throws against spells and
arandom location on the Astral Plane. The gate other magical effects. If you have 17 or more levels
then closes. The gate is one-way only and can't be in the Paladin class, the size of the Emanation in-
reopened. creases to 30 feet.

CHAPTER 7| TREASURE 269

14100 Requirement
Hor OF BLASTING 01-40 None
Wondrous Item, Rare
a-75 Proficiency with all
You can take a Magic action to blow the horn, Simple weapons
which emits a thunderous blast in a 30-foot Cone
76-90 Bronze 4 Training with all
that is audible out to 600 feet. Each creature in the
Cone makes a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On Medium armor
a failed save, a creature takes Sd8 Thunder damage 91-00 Iron 5 Proficiency with all
and has the Deafened condition forI minute. Ona Martial weapons
successful save, a creature takes half
as much dam-
age only. Glass or crystal objects in the Cone that
aren't being worn or carried take 10d8 Thunder HorsESHOES OF A ZEPHYR
damage. Wondrous Item, Very Rare
Each use of the horn’s magic has a 20 percent
‘These horseshoes come in a set of four. As a Magic
chance ofcausing the horn to explode. The ex-
action, you can touch one ofthe horseshoes to the
plosion deals 10d6 Force damage to the user and
hoof ofa horse or similar creature, whereupon the
destroys the horn.
horseshoe affixes itself to the hoof. Removing a
horseshoe also takes a Magic action.
While all four shoes are affixed to the hooves of
Horn or SILENT ALARM
a horse or similar creature, they allow the creature
Wondrous Item, Common
tomove normally while floating
4 inches above a
This horn has 4 charges and regains Id4 expended surface. This effect means the creature can cross
charges daily at dawn. As a Magic action, you can
or stand above nonsolid or unstable surfaces, such
blow the horn while expending I charge. One crea- as water or lava. The creature leaves no tracks and
ture ofyour choice hears the horn's blare, provided ignores Difficult Terrain. In addition, the creature
that creature is within 600 feet of the horn. No can travel for up to 12 hours a day without gaining
other creature hears the horn. Exhaustion levels from extended travel.

Horn OF VALHALLA HorsesHoes OF SPEED
Wondrous Item, Rare (Silver or Brass), Very Rare Wondrous Item, Rare
(Bronze), or Legendary (Iron)
‘These horseshoes come in a set of four. As a Magic
You can take a Magic action to blow this horn. In action, you can touch one of the horseshoes to the
response, warrior spirits from the plane of Ysgard hoof ofa horse or similar creature, whereupon the
appear in unoccupied spaces within 60 feet of you. horseshoe affixes itself to the hoof. Removing a
Each spirit uses the Berserker stat block and re- horseshoe also takes a Magic action.
turns to Ysgard afterI hour or when it drops to 0 ‘While all four horseshoes are attached to the
Hit Points. The spirits look like living, breathing
same creature, its Speed is increased by 30 feet.
warriors, and they have Immunity to the Charmed
and Frightened conditions. Once you use the horn,
it can't be used again until 7 days have passed. ImMovaBLe Rop
Four types of Horn of Valhalla are known to ex- Rod, Uncommon
ist, each made of a different metal. The horn's type
‘This iron rod has a button on one end. You can take
determines how many spirits it summons, as well
a Utilize action to press the button, which causes
as the requirement for its use. The DM chooses the
the rod to become magically fixed in place. Until you
horn's type or determines it randomly by rolling on
or another creature takes a Utilize action to push
the following table.
the button again, the rod doesn’t move, even if it
If you blow the horn without meeting its require-
defies gravity. The rod can hold up to 8,000 pounds
ment, the summoned spirits attack you. If you meet
of weight. More weight causes the rod to deactivate
the requirement, they are Friendly to you and your
and fall. A creature can take a Utilize action to
allies and follow your commands.
make a DC 30 Strength (Athletics) check, moving
the fixed rod up to 10 feet on a successful check.

270 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Inmovaae

Roo

HoRw oF Vatwatca

Hoan or

Buastine

INSTRUMENT OF ILLUSIONS
Wondrous Item, Common

While you are playing this musical instrument, you
can take a Magic action to create harmless, illusory
visual effects within a 5-foot Emanation ori
from the instrument. If you are a Bard, the si
the Emanation increases to 15 feet. Sample visual
effects include luminous musical notes, a spectral
dancer, butterflies, and gently falling snow. The
magical effects have neither substance nor sound,
and they are obviously illusory. The effects end
when you stop playing.

INSTRUMENT OF SCRIBING
Instrument or
Wondrous Item, Common
Juusions
This musical instrument has 3 charges and regains
all expended charges daily at dawn. While you are
playing it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1
charge and write a magical message on a nonmagi-
cal object or surface that you can see within 30 feet
of yourself. The message can be up to six words long
and is written in a language you know. If you are
a Bard, you can scribe an additional seven words
and make the message glow faintly, allowing it to
be seen in nonmagical Darkness. Casting the Dispel
Magic spell on the message erases it. Otherwise, the
message fades away after 24 hours.

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 271 |

INSTRUMENT OF THE BARDS
Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement
by
Bard)
Camarre
Manoouin ‘An Instrumof
ent
the Bards is superior to an ordinary
strument in every way. Seven types of these in-
struments exist, each named aftera bard college.
The Instruments of the Bards table lists the spells
common to all instruments, as well as the spells
specific to each one and its rarity. A creature that
attempts to play the instrument without being at-
tuned to it must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving
throw or take 244 Psychic damage.
You can play the instrument to cast one of its
spells. Once the instrument has been used to cast
a spell, it can’t be used to cast that spell again until
the next dawn. The spells use yourspelleasting abil-
ity and spell save DC.

INSTRUMENTS OF THE BARDS
Anstaure
Haae
Instrument Rarity Spells
All — Fly Invisibility, Levitate,
Protection from Evil
and Good, plus the
spells listed for the
particular instrument

Anstruth harp Very Rare Cure Wounds (level
5), Ice Storm, Wall of
Thorns

Canaith Rare Cure Wounds (level
Focmuucan,
Banoore
mandolin 3), Dispel Magic, Pro-
tection from Energy
(Lightning damage
Mac-Furnmion only)
Corres
Clilyre Rare Stone Shape, Wall of
Fire, Wind Wall

Doss lute Uncommon Animal Friendship,
Protection from Energy
(Fire damage only),
Protection from Poison
Fochlucan Uncommon Entangle, Faerie Fire,
bandore Shillelagh, Speak with
Animals

Mac-Fuirmidh Uncommon Barkskin, Cure Wounds,
cittern Fog Cloud
Ollamh harp Legendary Confusion, Control
Weather, Fire Storm

Town Sones

spell has no effect, and any resources used to cast
IouN STONE it are wasted. Once the stone has canceled 20 lev-

Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement) els of spells, it burns out, turns dull gray, and loses
its magic.
Roughly marble sized, loun Stones are named after
Insight (Very Rare). Your Wisdom increases by 2,
Toun, a god of knowledge and prophecy revered on
to.a maximum of 20, while this incandescent blue
some worlds. Many types offoun Stones exist, each
sphere orbits your head.
type a distinct combination of shape and color.
Intellect (Very Rare). Your Intelligence increases
When you take a Magic action to toss an foun
by 2, toa maximum of 20, while this marbled scar-
Stone into the air, the stone orbits your head at a
let and blue sphere orbits your head.
distance of 1d3 feet, conferring its benefit to you
Leadership (Very Rare). Your Charisma increases
while doing so. You can have up to three foun Stones
by 2, toa maximum of 20, while this marbled pink
orbiting your head at the same time.
and green sphere orbits your head.
Each Joun Stone orbiting your head is considered
Mastery (Legendary). Your Proficiency Bonus in-
to be an object you are wearing. The orbiting stone
creases by I while this pale green prism orbits your
avoids contact with other creatures and objects, ad-
head.
justing its orbit to avoid collisions and thwarting all
Protection (Rare). You gain a +1 bonus to Armor
attempts by other creatures to attack or snatch it.
Class while this dusty-rose prism orbits your head.
‘As a Utilize action, you can seize and stow any
Regeneration (Legendary). You regain 15 Hit
number of foun Stones orbiting your head. If your
Points at the end of each hour this pearly white
Attunement to an Joun Stone ends while it's orbit-
spindle orbits your head if you have at least 1 Hit
ing your head, the stone falls as though you had
Point.
dropped it.
Reserve (Rare). This vibrant purple prism stores
The type of stone determines its rarity and effects.
spells cast into it, holding them until you use them.
Absorption (Very Rare). While this pale lavender
The stone can store up to 4 levels of spells at a time.
ellipsoid orbits your head, you can take a Reaction
‘When found, it contains 1d4 levels of stored spells
to cancel a spell of level 4 or lower cast by a crea-
chosen by the DM.
ture you can see. A canceled spell has no effect, and
Any creature can cast a spell of level 1 through 4
any resources used to cast it are wasted. Once the
into the stone by touching it as the spell is cast. The
stone has canceled 20 levels ofspells, it burns out,
spell has no effect, other than to be stored in the
turns dull gray, and loses its magic.
stone. If the stone can't hold the spell, the spell is ex-
Agility (Very Rare). Your Dexterity increases by
pended without effect. The level of the slot used to
2, to amaximum of 20, while this deep-red sphere
cast the spell determines how much space it uses.
orbits your head.
While this stone orbits your head, you can cast,
Awareness (Rare). While this dark-blue rhomboid
any spell stored in it. The spell uses the slot level,
orbits your head, you have Advantage on Initiative
save DC, spell attack bonus, and spellcasting
rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks.
ity of the original caster but is otherwise treated
Fortitude (Very Rare). Your Constitution increases
as if you cast the spell. The spell cast from the stone
by 2, toa maximum of 20, while this pink rhomboid
is no longer stored in it, freeing up space.
orbits your head.
Strength (Very Rare). Your Strength increases by
Greater Absorption (Legendary). While this mar-
2, toa maximum of 20, while this pale blue rhom-
bled lavender and green ellipsoid orbits your head,
boid orbits your head.
you can take a Reaction to cancel a spell of level 8
Sustenance (Rare). You don't need to eat or drink
or lower cast by a creature you can see. A canceled
while this clear spindle orbits your head.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 273

Iron Banos oF
Buanno

JaveLin or

Licwerwin

TRON BANDS OF BILARRO.
Wondrous Item, Rare

This rusty iron sphere measures 3 inches in diame-
ter and weighs 1 pound. You can take a Magic action
to throw the sphere at a Huge or smaller creature
creature then obeys your commands for 1 hour,
you can see within 60 feet of yourself. As the
sphere moves through the air, it opens into a tangle understanding those commands even if it doesn't
know the language in which the commands are
of metal bands.
given. If you issue no commands or give the crea
Make a ranged attack roll with an attack bonus
ture a command that is likely to result in its death
equal to your Dexterity modifier plus your Pro-
or imprisonment, it defends itself but otherwise
ficiency Bonus. On a hit, the target has the Re-
takes no actions. At the end of the duration, the
strained condition until you take a Bonus Action to
creature acts in accordance with its normal disposi-
issue a command that releases it. Doing so or miss-
ing with the attack causes the bands to contract and tion and alignment.
An Identify spell reveals ifthe flask contains a
become a sphere once more.
creature, but the only way to determine the type
A creature that can touch the bands, including the
one Restrained, can take an action to make a DC 20
of creature is to open the flask. A newly discovered
Iron Flask might already contain a creature chosen
Strength (Athletics) check to break the iron bands.
by the DM or determined randomly by rolling on
Ona successful check, the item is destroyed, and the
Restrained creature is freed. Ona failed check, any
the following table (see the Monster Manual for the
further attempts made by that creature automati- creature's stat block).

cally fail until 24 hours have elapsed. 1d100 Contents 1d100 Contents
Once the bands are used, they can't be used again
01-50 Nocreature 76-77 Invisible Stalker
until the next dawn,
51 Arcanaloth 78-79 Marid

52-54 Bone Devil 380 Marilith
TRON FLASK
55-56 Cambion 81-82 Mezzoloth
Wondrous Item, Legendary
57-58 Dao 83-84 Nalfeshnee
While holding this brass-stoppered iron flask, you
can take a Magic action to target a creature that 59 Deva 85-86 Night Hag
you can see within 60 feet of yourself. Ifthe flask 60-61 Djinni 87-88 Nycaloth
is empty and the target is native to a plane of exis-
62-63 Efreeti 89 Planetar
tence other than the one you're on, the target must,
succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or be 64-65. Erinyes 90-91 Red Slaad
trapped in the flask. If the target has been trapped 66-67 Fomorian 92-93 Salamander
by the flask before, it has Advantage on the save.
68 Githyanki Knight 94 Solar
Once trapped, a creature remains in the flask until
released. The flask can hold only one creature at a 69 — Githzerai Zerth 95 Succubus
time. A creature trapped in the flask doesn't age and 70-71 Glabrezu 96 Ultroloth
doesn't need to breathe, eat, or drink,
72-74 Hezrou 97-99 Vrock
You can take a Magic action to remove the flask’s
stopper and release the creature in the flask. The 75 Incubus 00 Xorn

274 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Keoawron’s
Owrmenr

Luck Buaoe
(Stonrswono)

Lanreen oF

Reveauine

JAVELIN oF LIGHTNING
Weapon (Javelin), Uncommon

Each time you make an attack roll with this magic Lock oF TRICKERY
‘weapon and hit, you can have it deal Lightning dam- Wondrous Item, Common
age instead of Piercing damage. This lock appears to be an ordinary Lock (of the
Lightning Bolt. When you throw this weapon at a type described in chapter 6 of the Player’s Handbook)
target no farther than 120 feet from you, you can and comes with a single key. The tumblers in this
forgo making a ranged attack roll and instead turn. lock magically adjust to thwart burglars. Dexterity
the weapon into a bolt of lightning. This bolt forms checks made to pick the lock have Disadvantage.
a 5-foot-wide Line between you and the target. The
target and each other creature in the Line (exclud-
ing you) makes a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, tak- Luck BLapE
ing 4d6 Lightning damage on a failed save or half Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier,
as much damage on a successful one. Immediately Scimitar, Sickle, or Shortsword), Legendary (Requires
after dealing this damage, the weapon reappears in Attunement)
your hand. This property can’t be used again until
You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
the next dawn,
made with this magic weapon. While the weapon is
on your person, you also gain a +1 bonus to saving
throws.
KEOGHTOM’s OINTMENT
Luck. If the weapon is on your person, you can call
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
on its luck (no action required) to reroll one failed
This glass jar, 3 inches in diameter, contains 1d4 + 1 D20 Test if you don't have the Incapacitated condi:
doses ofa thick mixture that smells faintly ofaloe. tion. You must use the second roll. Once used, this
The jar and its contents weigh 1/2 pound. property can't be used again until the next dawn.
Asa Utilize action, you can swallow one dose of Wish. The weapon has 1d3 charges. While holding
the ointment or apply it to a creature within 5 feet it, you can expend I charge and cast Wish from it.
of yourself. The creature that receives it regains Once used, this property can't be used again until
2d8 + 2 Hit Points and ceases to have the Poisoned the next dawn, The weapon loses this property if it,
condition. has no charges.

LANTERN OF REVEALING Lute or THUNDEROUS THUMPING
Wondrous Item, Uncommon Weapon (Club), Very Rare
While lit, this hooded lantern burns for 6 hours on 1 This reinforced lute can be wielded as a magic Club
pint of oil, shedding Bright Light in a 30-foot radius that deals an extra 248 Thunder damage on a hit.
and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet. Invisible Sing and Swing. If you're a Bard, you can use your
creatures and objects are visible as long as they are Charisma modifier instead of your Strength modi-
in the lantern’s Bright Light. You can take a Utilize fier when making a melee attack roll with the lute,
action to lower the hood, reducing the lantern’s provided you sing or hum while making the attack.
light to Dim Light in a 5-foot radius.

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 275

Mace oF DisruPTION Mace OF TERROR
Weapon (Mace), Rare (Requires Attunement) Weapon (Mace). Rare (Requires Attunement)

‘When you hit a Fiend or an Undead with this magic ‘This magic weapon has 3 charges and regains 143
weapon, that creature takes an extra 2d6 Radiant expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the
damage. If the target has 25 Hit Points or fewer ‘weapon, you can take a Magic action and expend
after taking this damage, it must succeed on a DC 1 charge to release a wave of terror from it.Each
15 Wisdom saving throw or be destroyed. On a suc- creature of your choice within 30 feet of you must
cessful save, the creature has the Frightened condi- succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or have
tion until the end of your next turn. the Frightened condition for 1 minute. While Fright-
Light, While you hold this weapon, it sheds Bright ened in this way, a creature must spend its turns
Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi- trying
to move as far away from you as it can, and
tional 20 feet. it can’t make Opportunity Attacks. For its action, it
can use only the Dash action or try to escape from
an effect that prevents it from moving. If it has no-
Mace OF SMITING where it can move, the creature can take the Dodge
Weapon (Mace), Rare action. At the end of each of its turns, a creature
You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage repeats the save, ending the effect on itself on a
rolls made with this magic weapon. The bonus in- success,

creases to +3 when you use the weapon to attack a
Construct.
‘When you roll a 20 on an attack roll made with MANTLE OF SPELL RESISTANCE
this weapon, the target takes an extra 7 Bludgeon- Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)

ing damage, or 14 Bludgeoning damage if it’s a You have Advantage on saving throws against spells
Construct. If a Construct has 25 Hit Points or fewer while you wear this cloak.
after taking this damage, it is destroyed.

Mace oF
Smiring

Mace or

Diseuerion
Mantis oF Soeut
Resisrance

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Manat or Boptty HEALTH MANUAL OF GOLEMS
Wondrous Item, Very Rare Wondrous Item, Very Rare

This book contains health and nutrition tips, and This tome contains information and incantations
its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 necessary to make a particular type of golem. The
hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the DM chooses the type or determines it randomly by
book’s contents and practicing its guidelines, your rolling on the accompanying table. To decipher and
Constitution increases by 2, toa maximum of 30. use the manual, you must be a spellcaster with at
‘The manual then loses its magic but regains it in a least two level 5 spell slots. A creature that can't use
century. a Manual of Golems and attempts to read it takes 646
Psychic damage.
To create a golem, you must spend the time shown
MANUAL OF GAINFUL EXERCISE on the table, working without interruption with the
Wondrous Item, Very Rare ‘manual at hand and resting no more than 8 hours
‘This book describes fitness exercises, and its words per day. You must also pay the specified cost to pur-
are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over chase supplies.
a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book’s con- ‘Once you finish creating the golem, the book is,
tents and practicing its guidelines, your Strength in- consumed in eldritch flames. The golem becomes
creases by 2, to a maximum of 30. The manual then animate when the ashes of the manual are sprinkled
loses its magic but regains it in a century. on it. See the Monster Manual for the golem’s stat
block. The golem is under your control, and it un-
derstands and obeys your commands.

1d20 Golem Time Cost

1-5 ClayGolem 30 days 65,000 GP

6-17 FleshGolem 60 days 50,000 GP
18 tron Golem 120 days 100,000 GP

19-20 Stone Golem 90 days 80,000 GP
Manone

or Govens
(Cua)

Manas oF
A Govems (Fuesw

Manuat or

Boouy Meaurn

Manuae oF

Govems (Ion)

Manuas oF

Gouems (Stone)

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Meoation oF
Twouenrs

Minnom oF Lire

Teanvine

Manuat oF Maninen’s
Quickness oF
Anwon
Action
(Learwen

Aamon)

MANUAL OF QUICKNESS OF ACTION
Wondrous Item, Very Rare
Mirror OF LIFE TRAPPING
This book contains coordination and balance Wondrous Item, Very Rare
exercises, and its words are charged with magic.
When this 4-foot-tall, 2-foot-wide mirror is viewed
If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or
indirectly, its surface shows faint images of crea-
fewer studying the book’s contents and practicing
tures. The mirror weighs 50 pounds, and it has AC
its guidelines, your Dexterity increases by 2, toa
U1, HP 10, Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage,
maximum of 30. The manual then loses its magic
and Vulnerability to Bludgeoning damage. It shat-
but regains it in a century.
ters and is destroyed when reduced to 0 Hit Points.
If the mirror is hanging on a vertical surface and
you are within 5 feet of it, you can take a Magic
MARINER’s ARMOR
Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Uncommon action and use a command word to activate it. It
remains activated until you take a Magic action and
While wearing this armor, you have a Swim Speed repeat the command word to deactivate i
equal to your Speed. In addition, if you start your
Any creature other than you that sees its reflee-
turn underwater with 0 Hit Points, you immedi-
tion in the activated mirror while within 30 feet
ately regain Id4 Hit Points. The armor can't heal
of the mirror must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma
anyone again until the next dawn,
saving throw or be trapped, along with anything it
The armor is decorated with fish and shell motifs.
is wearing or carrying, in one of the mirror's twelve
extradimensional cells. A creature that knows the
mirror’s nature makes the save with Advantage, and
MEDALLION OF THOUGHTS
Constructs succeed on the save automatically.
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
An extradimensional cell is an infinite expanse
The medallion has 5 charges. While wearing it, you filled with thick fog that reduces visibility to 10 feet.
can expend | charge to cast Detect Thoughts (save Creatures trapped in the mirror’s cells don't age,
DC 13) from it. The medallion regains Id4 expended and they don't need to eat, drink, or sleep. A crea-
charges daily at dawn, ture trapped within a cell can escape using magic

278 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

MOONBLADE
Weapon (Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or
Shortsword), Legendary (Requires Attunement by a
Creature of the Weapon's Choice)
Ofall the magic items created by elves, one of the
most prized and jealously guarded is a Moonblade. In
ancient times, nearly all elven noble houses claimed
‘one such weapon. Over the centuries, some of these
Moonscave weapons have faded from the world, their magic lost
(onasworo) as family lines have become extinct. Others have
vanished with their bearers during great quests.
Thus, only a few of these weapons remain.
Every Moonblade longs for a bearer whose dis-
that permits planar travel. Otherwise, the creature position and goals are compatible with its own. If
is confined to the cell until freed. you try to attune to a Moonblade that doesn't want
If the mirror traps a creature but its twelve ex- you as its bearer, the weapon not only rejects you
tradimensional cells are already occupied, the mir- but also places a curse on you, causing you to make
ror frees one trapped creature at random to accom- D20 Tests with Disadvantage for 24 hours or until
modate the new prisoner. A freed creature appears the curse is ended by a Remove Curse spell or similar
in an unoccupied space within sight of the mirror magic. If you're accepted by the weapon and try to
but facing away from it. If the mirror is shattered, attune to it, you become attuned to it instantly, and.
all creatures it contains are freed and appear in un- anew rune appears on it. You remain attuned to the
‘occupied spaces near it. ‘weapon until you die or the weapon is destroyed. A.
While within 5 feet of the mirror, you can take a Moonblade functions like a nonmagical weapon of
Magic action to name one creature trapped in it or its kind for anyone other than its chosen bearer.
call out a particular cell by number. The creature ‘A Moonblade has one rune on it for each bearer
named or contained in the named cell appears as an it has willingly served (typically 146 + 1). The first
image on the mirror's surface. You and the creature rune grants a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage
can then communicate. rolls made with this magic weapon. Each rune be-
Ina similar way, you can take a Magic action and yond the first grants the Moonblade an additional
use a second command word to free one creature property. The DM chooses each property or de-
trapped in the mirror. The freed creature appears, termines it randomly by rolling on the Moonblade
along with its possessions, in the unoccupied space Properties table.
nearest to the mirror and facing away from it. ‘Minor Property. In addition to its aforementioned
Placing the mirror inside an extradimensional properties, each Moonblade has a minor property
space created by a Bag of Holding, Portable Hole, or determined by rolling on the Magic Item’s Minor
similar item instantly destroys both items and opens Property table (see earlier in this chapter).
a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate originates where Sentience. A Moonblade is a sentient weapon with
the one item was placed inside the other. Any crea- an Intelligence of 12, a Wisdom of 10, and a Cha-
ture within 10 feet of the gate and not behind Total risma of 12. It has hearing and Darkvision out to
Cover is sucked through it to a random location on 120 feet. Its alignment matches that ofits creator.
the Astral Plane. The gate then closes. The gate is The weapon communicates by transmitting
one-way only and can't be reopened. emotions, sending a tingling sensation through the
wielder’s hand when it wants to communicate some-
thing it has sensed. It can communicate through
MITHRAL ARMOR
visions or dreams when the wielder is either in a
Armor (Any Medium or Heavy, Except Hide Armor), trance or asleep.
‘Uncommon Personality. A Moonblade has a personality similar
Mithral is alight, flexible metal. Armor made of this, to that of its creator. Once a Moonblade has decided
substance can be worn under normal clothes. If the on an owner, it believes that only that person should
armor normally imposes Disadvantage on Dexterity wield it, even if the bearer's alignment differs from
(Stealth) checks or has a Strength requirement, the that of the weapon's or the bearer's goals later clash
mithral version of the armor doesn't. with the weapon's goals.

CHAPTER
7 | TREASURE

Moon-Toueweo
Sworo (RarieR)

MoonstabE Properties
Moon-ToucHeEp SworD
1d100 Property
Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier,
01-60 Increase the weapon's bonus to attack rolls Scimitar, or Shortsword), Common
and damage rolls by 1, to a maximum of In Darkness, the unsheathed blade of this weapon
+3. Reroll ifthe Moonblade already has a +3 sheds moonlight, creating Bright Light in a 15-foot
bonus. radius and Dim Light for an additional 15 feet.
61-75 When you hit with an attack roll using the
Moonblade, you deal an extra 146 Force
Mystery Key
damage. Each time the weapon gains this
Wondrous Item, Common
property after the first, the extra damage in-
A question mark is worked into the head of this key.
creases by 1d6,
to a maximum of 3d6. Reroll
The key has a 5 percent chance of unlocking any
if the Moonblade already deals an extra 346
lock into which it’s inserted. Once it unlocks some-
Force damage on a hit.
thing, the key disappears.
76-80 The Moonblade gains the Thrown property
with a normal range of 20 feet and a long
range of 60 feet. Each time you throw the Nature's MANTLE
weapon, it flies back to your hand after the Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement bya

attack. Druid or Ranger)

81-85 The Moonblade scores a Critical Hit on a roll This cloak shifts color and texture to blend with the
terrain surrounding
you. While wearing the cloak,
of 19 or 20 on the d20.
you can use it as a Spellcasting Focus for your
86-95. You can take a Bonus Action to cause the Druid and Ranger spells.
Moonblade to flash brightly. Each other While you are in an area that is Lightly Obscured,
‘creature that is within 30 feet of you and not you can Hide as a Bonus Action even if you are be-
behind Total Cover must succeed on a DC ing directly observed.
15 Constitution saving throw or have the
Blinded condition for 1 minute. A creature
NECKLACE OF ADAPTATION
repeats the save at the end ofeach of its
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
turns, ending the effect on itself on a suc-
cess. You can't use this property again until While wearing this necklace, you can breathe nor-
you finish a Short or Long Rest. mally in any environment, and you have Advantage
on saving throws made to avoid or end the Poisoned
96-99 The Moonblade has the properties of a Ring
condition.
of Spell Storing.

00 You can take a Magic action to conjure a
spectral entity that resembles a shadowy elf NECKLACE OF FIREBALLS
if you don't already have one serving you. Wondrous Item, Rare
The entity appears in an unoccupied space This necklace has 1d6 + 3 beads hanging from it.
within 120 feet of you. It uses the Shadow You can take a Magic action to detach a bead and
stat block with these changes: it is a Fey, throw it up to 60 feet away. When it reaches the
has a Neutral alignment, and doesn’t create end of its trajectory, the bead detonates as a level 3
new shadows. You control this entity, decid- Fireball (save DC 15).
You can hurl multiple beads, or even the whole
ing how it acts and moves. It remains until
necklace, at one time. When you do so, increase the
it drops to 0 Hit Points or you dismiss it as.
damage of the Fireball by 1d6 for each bead after the
a Magic action.
first (maximum 1246).

280. CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Neckvace oF Navune’s

Fincoaues Mantie

NECKLACE OF PRAYER BEADS
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Cleric,
Druid, or Paladin)

This necklace has 1d4 + 2 magic beads made from
aquamarine, black pearl, or topaz. It also has many
nonmagical beads made from stones such as amber,
bloodstone, citrine, coral, jade, pearl, or quartz, Ifa
magic bead is removed from the necklace, that bead
loses its magic.
Six types of magic beads exist. The DM decide:
the type of each bead on the necklace or determines
it randomly by rolling on the table below. A neck-
lace can have more than one bead of the same type.
To use one, you must be wearing the necklace. Each
bead contains a spell that you can cast from it as a
Bonus Action (using your spell save DC if a save is
necessary). Once a magic bead's spell is cast, that
bead can’t be used again until the next dawn.

1420 Bead Spell

1-6 BeadofBlessing Bless
7-12, Bead of Curing Cure Wounds (level 2
version)

13-16 Bead of Favor Greater Restoration
W-AB Bead of Smiting Shining Smite

19 Bead ofSummons Guardian of Faith

20 Bead of Wind Wind Walk
Walking

Nine Lives

Nine Lives STEALER
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Very Rare (Requires (Gaearswono)

Attunement)

You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls,
made with this magic weapon.
Life Stealing. The weapon has 1d8 + 1 charges.
When you attack a creature that has fewer than
100 Hit Points with this weapon and roll a 20 on
the d20 for the attack roll, the creature must suc-
ceed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be
slain instantly as the sword tears its life force from
its body. Constructs and Undead succeed on the
save automatically. The weapon loses | charge if the
creature is slain. When the weapon has no charges
remaining, it loses this property.

Nouzur's MARVELOUS PIGMENTS
Wondrous Item, Very Rare

This fine wooden box contains 1d4 pots of pigment Nowzun’s

and a brush (weighing1 pound in total). Maavecous

Promenrs

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 281

Using the brush and expending 1 pot of pigment,
you can paint any number of three-dimensional
objects and terrain features (such as walls, doors,
trees, flowers, weapons, webs, and pits), provided
these elements are all confined to a 20-foot Cube.
The effort takes 10 minutes (regardless of the num-
ber of elements you create), during which time you
must remain in the Cube, and requires Concentra~
tion. If your Concentration is broken or you leave
the Cube before the work is done, all the painted
elements vanish, and the pot of pigment is wasted.
‘When the work is done, all the painted objects
and terrain features become real. Thus, painting a
door on a wall creates an actual door, which can be
‘opened to whatever is beyond. Painting a pit creates
areal pit, the entire depth of which must lie within
the 20-foot Cube.
No object created by a pot of pigment can have
a value greater than 25 GP, and the total value of
Ons oF
all objects created by a pot of pigment can't exceed
Diaection
500 GP. If you paint objects of greater value (such
asa large pile of gold), they look authentic, but close
inspection reveals they're made from paste, cookies,
or some other worthless material.
If you paint a form of energy such as fire or light-
ning, the energy dissipates as soon as you complete Oi or ETHEREALNESS
the painting, doing no harm. Potion, Rare

‘One vial of this oil can cover one Medium or
smaller creature, along with the equipment it's
OatHBow wearing and carrying (one additional vial is re-
Weapon (Longbow or Shortbow), Very Rare (Requires quired for each size category above Medium), Ap-
Attunement) plying the oil takes 10 minutes. The affected crea-
When you nock an arrow on this bow, it whispers in ture then gains the effect of the Btherealness spell
Elvish, “Swift defeat to my enemies.” When you use for 1 hour.
this weapon to make a ranged attack, you can utter Beads of this cloudy, gray oil form on the outside
or sign the following command words: “Swift death of its container and quickly evaporate.
to you who have wronged me.” The target of your
attack becomes your sworn enemy until it dies or
until dawn 7 days later. You can have only one such O11 OF SHARPNESS
sworn enemy at a time. When your sworn enemy Potion, Very Rare
dies, you can choose a new one after the next dawn. One vial of this oil can coat one Melee weapon or
‘When you make a ranged attack roll with this twenty pieces of ammunition, but only ammunition
weapon against your sworn enemy, you have Ad- and Melee weapons that are nonmagical and deal
vantage on the roll. In addition, your target gains no Slashing or Piercing damage are affected. Applying
benefit from Half Cover or Three-Quarters Cover, the oil takes 1 minute, after which the oil magically
and you suffer no Disadvantage due to long range. ‘seeps into whatever it coats, turning the coated
Ifthe attack hits, your sworn enemy takes an extra weapon into a +5 Weapon or the coated ammunition
3d6 Piercing damage. into +3 Ammunitio
While your sworn enemy lives, you have Disad- This clear, gelatinous oil sparkles with tiny,
vantage on attack rolls with all other weapons. ultrathin silver shards.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Or oF SuiPPERINESS Ors OF DRAGONKIND
Potion, Uncommon Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement)

One vial of this oil can cover one Medium or Long ago, in the Dragonlance setting, elves and
smaller creature, along with the equipment it’s humans waged a terrible war against chromatic
wearing and carrying (one additional vial i dragons. When the world seemed doomed, the wiz-
quired for each size category above Medium). ards of the Towers of High Sorcery came together
Applying the oil takes 10 minutes. The affected and forged five Orbs of Dragonkind to help defeat
creature then gains the effect of the Freedom of the dragons. One orb was taken to each of the five
Movement spell for 8 hours. towers, and there they were used to speed the war
Alternatively, the oil can be poured on the ground toward a victorious end. The wizards used the orbs
as a Magic action, where it covers a 10-foot square, to lure dragons to them, then destroyed the dragons
duplicating the effect of the Grease spell in that area with powerful magi
for 8 hours. As the Towers of High Sorcery fell in later ages,
This sticky, black unguent is thick and heavy, but the orbs were destroyed or faded into legend, and
it flows quickly when poured. only three are thought to survive. Their magic has,
been warped over the centuries. Their primary pur-
pose ofcalling dragons still Functions, but they also
Ors oF DirEcTION allow some measure of control over dragons.
Wondrous Item, Common Each orb contains the essence of an evil dragon,
‘This orb can be used as an Arcane Focus. a presence that resents any attempt to coax magic
While holding this orb, you can take a Magic from it. Those who try to wield an orb’s magic but
action to determine which way is magnetic north. lack sufficient force of personality might find them-
Nothing happens if the orb is used in a location that selves under the orb’s control.
has no magnetic north.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 283

An orb is an etched crystal globe about 10 inches
diameter. When used, it grows to about 20 inches Ors oF TIME
in diameter, and mist swirls inside it.
Wondrous Item, Common
While attuned to an orb, you can take a Magic
This orb can be used as an Arcane Focus.
action to peer into the orb’s depths. You must then
‘While holding the orb, you can take a Magic ac-
make a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a success-
tion to determine whether it is morning, afternoon,
ful save, you control the orb for as long as you re-
evening, or nighttime. This property functions only
main attuned to it.On a failed save, the orb imposes,
on the Material Plane.
the Charmed condition on you for as long as you
remain attuned to it.
While you are Charmed by the orb, you can’t
PEARL OF POWER
voluntarily end your Attunement to it, and the orb
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement bya
casts Suggestion on you at will (save DC 18), urging
Spellcaster)
you to work toward the evil ends it desires. The
dragon essence within the orb might want many While this pearl is on your person, you can take a
things: the annihilation of a particular society or Magic action to regain one expended spell slot of
organization, freedom from the orb, to spread suf- level 3 or lower. Once you use the pearl, it can’t be
fering
in the world, to advance the worship ofTia- used again until the next dawn.
mat, or something else the DM decides.
Random Properties. An Orb of Dragonkind has the
following random properties (see “Artifacts” in this PERFUME OF BEWITCHING
chapter): Wondrous Item, Common

This tiny vial contains magic perfume, enough for
+ 2minor beneficial properties
one use. You can take a Magic action to apply the
+ Iminor detrimental property
perfume to yourself, and its effect lasts 1 hour. For
+ I major detrimental property
the duration, you have Advantage on all Charisma
Spells. The orb has 7 charges and regains 1d4 + 3 (Deception and Persuasion) checks made to influ-
expended charges daily at dawn. If you control the ence a creature within 5 feet of yourself,
orb, you can cast one of the spells on the following
table from it. The table indicates how many charges
you must expend to cast the spell. PERIAPT OF HEALTH
Spell Charge Cost Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)

‘While wearing this pendant, you can take a Magic
‘Cure Wounds (level 9 version) 4
action to regain 2d4 + 2 Hit Points. Once used, this
Daylight 1
property can't be used again until the next dawn.
Death Ward 2 In addition, you have Advantage on saving throws

Detect Magic 0 to avoid or end the Poisoned condition while you
wear this pendant.
Scrying (save DC 18) 3

Call Dragons. While you control the orb, you
PERIAPT OF PROOF AGAINST POISON
‘can take a Magic action to cause the orb to issue a
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
telepathic call that extends in all directions for 40
miles. Chromatic dragons in range feel compelled ‘This delicate silver chain has a brilliant-cut black
to come to the orb as soon as possible by the most gem pendant. While you wear it, you have Immu-
direct route. Dragon deities such as Tiamat are un- nity to the Poisoned condition and Poison damage.
affected by this call. Chromatic dragons drawn to
the orb might be Hostile toward you for compelling
them against their will. Once you have used this PrRtapt OF WOUND CLOSURE
property, it can't be used again for I hour. Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
Destroying an Orb. An Orb of Dragonkind has AC While wearing this pendant, you gain the following
20 and is destroyed if it takes damage from a +5 benefits.
Weapon or a Disintegrate spell. Nothing else can Life Preservation. Whenever you make a Death
harm it. Saving Throw, you can change a roll of 9 or lower
toa 10, turning a failed save into a successful one.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

7 —

Peniapr
oF Penianr oF
Wouno C.osure

Pipes or
Haunting

Smoxe

Mowsrens
Pines oF tHe

Sewers

Natural Healing Boost. Whenever you roll a Hit
Point Die to regain Hit Points, double the number of
Hit Points it restores.

PHILTER OF LOVE
Potion, Uncommon
it at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect,
The next time you see a creature within 10 minutes on itself on a success. A creature that succeeds on
after drinking this philter, you are charmed by that its save is immune to the effect of these pipes for 24
creature and have the Charmed condition for1 hours.
hour.
This rose-hued, effervescent liquid contains one
easy-to-miss bubble shaped like a heart. PIPES OF THE SEWERS
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
‘While these pipes are on your person, ordinary rats
Prpe of SMOKE MONSTERS
and giant rats are Indifferent toward you and won't
Wondrous Item, Common
attack you unless you threaten or harm them.
While smoking this pipe, you can take a Magic ac- The pipes have 3 charges and regain 1d3 expended
tion to exhale a puff of smoke that takes the form charges daily at dawn. If you play the pipes as a
ofa creature, such as a dragon, a flumph, or a slaad. Magic action, you can take a Bonus Action to ex-
‘The form must be small enough to fit in a I-foot pend I to 3 charges, calling forth one Swarm of
cube and loses its shape after a few seconds, becom- Rats with each expended charge if enough rats
ing an ordinary puff of smoke. are within halfa mile of you to be called in this
fashion (as determined by the DM). If there aren't
enough rats to form a swarm, the charge is wasted.
Pipes OF HAUNTING Called swarms move toward the music by the short-
Wondrous Item, Uncommon est available route but aren’t under your control
These pipes have 3 charges and regain 1d3 expended otherwise.
charges daily at dawn. You can take a Magic action Whenever a Swarm of Rats that isn't under an-
to play them and expend I charge to create an eerie, other creature's control comes within 30 feet of you
spellbinding tune. Each creature of your choice while you are playing the pipes, the swarm makes
within 30 feet of you must succeed on a DC 15 Wis- a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. On a successful
dom saving throw or have the Frightened condition save, the swarm behaves as it normally would and
for | minute. A creature that fails the save repeats can’t be swayed by the pipes’ music for the next 24

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 285

Porion oF hours. On a failed save, the swarm is swayed by the
pipes’ music and becomes Friendly to you and your
allies for as long as you continue to play the pipes
each round as a Magic action. A Friendly swarm
obeys your commands. If you issue no commands
toa Friendly swarm, it defends itself but otherwise
takes no actions. Ifa Friendly swarm starts its turn
more than 30 feet away from you, your control over
that swarm ends, and the swarm behaves as it nor
mally would and can't be swayed by the pipes’ music
for the next 24 hours.

PLATE ARMOR OF ETHEREALNESS
Armor (Half Plate Armor or Plate Armor), Legendary
(Requires Attunement)

Fine Baearn While you're wearing this armor, you can take a
Magic action and use a command word to gain the
effect of the Etherealness spell. The spell ends imme-
diately if you remove the armor or take a Magic ac-
tion to repeat the command word. This property of
the armor can't be used again until the next dawn,

POLE OF ANGLING
Wondrous Item, Common

This item functions as a Pole. While holding it, you
can take a Magic action to cause it to transform into
a fishing pole with a hook, a line, and a reel, or have
the fishing pole revert to a Pole.

POLE OF COLLAPSING
Wondrous Item, Common

Anwar oF This item functions as a Pole. While holding it,
you can take a Magic action to collapse it into a
1-foot-long rod for ease of storage (the pole’s weight
doesn't change) or cause the I-foot-long rod to re-
vert to a Pole. The rod elongates only as far as the
surrounding space allows.

PorTABLE HOLE
Wondrous Item, Rare

This fine black cloth, soft as silk, is folded up to the
dimensions of a handkerchief. It unfolds into a ci
cular sheet 6 feet in diameter.
You can take a Magic action to unfold a Porta-
Coutarsine
ble Hole and place it on or against a solid surface,
whereupon the Portable Hole creates an extradi-
mensional hole 10 feet deep. The cylindrical space
within the hole exists on a different plane of exis-
tence, so it can't be used to create open passages.
Any creature inside an open Portable Hole can exit
the hole by climbing out of it.

286

You can take a Magic action to close a Portable
Hole by taking hold of the edges of the cloth and PoTION OF COMPREHENSION
folding it up. Folding the cloth closes the hole, and
Potion, Common
any creatures or objects within remain in the ex-
When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of
tradimensional space. No matter what's init, the
the Comprehend Languages spell for 1 hour.
hole weighs next to nothing.
This potion's liquid is a clear concoction with bits
If the hole is folded up, a creature within the hole’s
of salt and soot swirling in it.
extradimensional space can take an action to make
a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check. On a successful
check, the creature forces its way out and appears
POTION OF DIMINUTION
within 5 feet of the Portable Hole. A closed Portable
Potion, Rare
Hole holds enough air for 1 hour ofbreathing, di-
vided by the number of breathing creatures inside. When you drink this potion, you gain the “reduce”
Placing a Portable Hole inside an extradimensional effect of the Enlarge/Reduce spell for 1d4 hours (no
space created by a Bag of Holding, Heward’s Handy Concentration required).
Haversack, or similar item instantly destroys both ‘The red in the potion’s liquid continuously con-
items and opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate tracts to a tiny bead and then expands to color the
originates where the one item was placed inside the clear liquid around it. Shaking the bottle fails to
other. Any creature within 10 feet of the gate and interrupt this process.
not behind Total Cover is sucked through it and
deposited in a random location on the Astral Plane.
‘The gate then closes. The gate is one-way only and POTION OF FIRE BREATH
can't be reopened. Potion, Uncommon

After drinking this potion, you can take a Bonus
Action to exhale fire at a target within 30 feet of
POTION OF ANIMAL FRIENDSHIP yourself. The target makes a DC 1 Dexterity saving
Potion, Uncommon throw, taking 4d6 Fire damage on a failed save or
‘When you drink this potion, you can cast the level 3 half as much damage on a successful one. The effect,
version of the Animal Friendship spell (save DC 13). ends after you exhale the fire three times or when 1
Agitating this potion's muddy liquid brings little hour has passed.
bits into view: a fish scale, a hummingbird feather, a This potion’s orange liquid flickers, and smoke fills
cat claw, or
a squirrel hair. the top of the container and wafts out whenever it
is opened.

POTION OF CLAIRVOYANCE
Potion, Rare PoTION OF FLYING
Potion, Very Rare
When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of
the Clairvoyance spell (no Concentration required). When you drink this potion, you gain a Fly Speed

An eyeball bobs in this potion's yellowish liquid equal to your Speed for 1 hour and can hover. If
but vanishes when the potion is opened. you're in the air when the potion wears off, you fall
unless you have some other means ofstaying aloft.
This potion's clear liquid floats at the top of its
POTION OF CLIMBING container and has cloudy white impurities drifting
Potion, Common init.

When you drink this potion, you gain a Climb
Speed equal to your Speed for 1 hour. During this
POTION OF GASEOUS FORM
time, you have Advantage on Strength (Athletics)
Potion, Rare
checks to climb.
‘This potion is separated into brown, silver, and When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of
gray layers resembling bands of stone. Shaking the the Gaseous Form spell for1 hour (no Concentration
bottle fails to mix the colors. required) or until you end the effect as a Bonus
Action.
This potion’s container seems to hold fog that
moves and pours like water.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 287

— = =

POTION OF GIANT STRENGTH POTION OF HEROISM
Potion, Rarity Varies Potion, Rare
‘When you drink this potion, your Strength score When you drink this potion, you gain 10 Temporary
changes for 1 hour. The type of giant determines the Hit Points that last for 1 hour. For the same dura-
score (see the table below). The potion has no effect tion, you are under the effect of the Bless spell (no
on you if your Strength is equal to or greater than Concentration required).
that score. ‘This potion’s blue liquid bubbles and steams as if
This potion’s transparent liquid has floating in it a boiling.
sliver of light resembling a giant's fingernail.

Potion Str. Rarity PoTION OF INVISIBILITY
Potion of Giant Strength (hill) 21 Uncommon’ Potion, Rare
Potion of Giant Strength (frost 23.-Rare ‘This potion’s container looks empty but feels as
or stone) though it holds liquid. When you drink the potion,
Potion of Giant Strength (fire) 25-Rare you have the Invisible condition forI hour. The
‘effect ends early if you make an attack roll, deal
Potion of Giant Strength (cloud) 27 Very Rare
damage, or cast a spell.
Potion of Giant Strength (storm) 29 Legendary

POTION OF INVULNERABILITY
POTION OF GREATER INVISIBILITY Potion, Rare
Potion, Very Rare For 1 minute after you drink this potion, you have
This potion’s container looks empty but feels as Resistance to all damage.
though it holds liquid. When you drink the potion, ‘This potion’s syrupy liquid looks like liquefied
you have the Invisible condition for 1 hour. iron.

POTION OF GROWTH Potion oF LONGEVITY
Potion, Uncommon Potion, Very Rare

‘When you drink this potion, you gain the “enlarge” ‘When you drink this potion, your physical age is
effect of the Enlarge/Reduce spell for 10 minutes (no reduced by 1d6 + 6 years, to a minimum of 13 years.
Concentration required). Each time you subsequently drink a Potion of Lon-
The red in the potion's liquid continuously ex- gevity, there is 10 percent cumulative chance that
pands from a tiny bead to color the clear liquid you instead age by 1d6 + 6 years.
around it and then contracts. Shaking the bottle Suspended in this amber liquid is a tiny heart that,
fails to interrupt this process. against all reason, is still beating. These ingredients
vanish when the potion is opened.

POTIONS OF HEALING
Potion, Rarity Vari POTION OF MIND READING
Potion, Rare
You regain Hit Points when you drink this potion.
‘The number of Hit Points depends on the potion’s When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of
rarity, as shown in the table below. the Detect Thoughts spell (save DC 13) for 10 minutes
‘Whatever its potency, the potion’s red liquid glim- (no Concentration required).
mers when agitated. This potion’s dense, purple liquid has an ovoid

Potion HP Regained Rarity cloud of pink floating in it.

Potion of Healing 2d4+2 Common
a

Potion of Healing Ada +4 Uncommon PoTION oF Porson
(greater) Potion, Uncommon

Potion of Healing 8d4+8 Rare This concoction looks, smells, and tastes like a

(superior) Potion of Healing or another beneficial potion.

Potion of Healing 1od4 + 20 Very Rare
(supreme)

Porion oF
Porion oF
Invisianiry
Pusitism

Porton oF
Heauine Porton oF

Virauiry

Sraenor
(Strom)

However, itis actually poison masked by illusion
magic. Identify reveals its true nature. Porion oF SPEED
If you drink this potion, you take 4d6 Poison Potion, Very Rare
damage and must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution
‘When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of
saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for1
the Haste spell for1minute (no Concentration re-
hour.
quired) without suffering the wave of lethargy that
typically occurs when the effect ends.
POTION OF PUGILISM This potion’s yellow fluid is streaked with black

Potion, Uncommon
and swirls on its own.

After you drink this potion, each Unarmed Strike
you make deals an extra 1d6 Force damage on a hit. Porion oF VITALITY
This effect lasts 10 minutes. Potion, Very Rare
This potion is a thick green fluid that tastes like
‘When you drink this potion, it removes any
spinach.
Exhaustion levels you have and ends the Poisoned
condition on you. For the next 24 hours, you regain,

POTION OF RESISTANCE the maximum number of Hit Points for any Hit
Point Die you spend.
Potion, Uncommon
This potion’s crimson liquid regularly pulses with
When you drink this potion, you have Resistance
dull light, calling
to mind a heartbeat.
to one type of damage for 1 hour. The DM chooses
the type or determines it randomly by rolling on the
following table. POTION OF WATER BREATHING
1d10 Damage Type 1d10 Damage Type Potion, Uncommon

1 Acid 6 — Necrotic You can breathe underwater for 24 hours after
drinking this potion.
2 Cold 7 Poison
This potion’s cloudy green fluid smells ofthe sea |
3 Fire 8 Psychic and has ajellyfish-like bubble floating in it.
4 Force 9 Radiant

5 Lightning 10 Thunder
Por oF AWAKENING
Wondrous Item, Common

Ifyou plant an ordinary shrub in this 10-pound clay
pot and let it grow for 30 days, the shrub magically
transforms into an Awakened Shrub at the end of

CHAPTER? | TREASURE 289

that time. When the shrub awakens, its roots break and an enormous, multicolored bird takes its place.
the pot, destroying it. ‘The bird has the statistics of a Roe, but it can't at-
The awakened shrub is Friendly toward you and tack. It obeys your simple commands and can carry
obeys your commands. Absent commands from up to 500 pounds while flying at its maximum
you, it does nothing. speed (16 miles per hour for a maximum of 144
miles per day, with a I-hour rest for every 3 hours of,
flying) or 1,000 pounds at half that speed. The bird
ProstHETic LimB disappears after flying its maximum distance for a
Wondrous Item, Common day or if it drops to 0 Hit Points. You can dismiss
‘This magic item replaces a lost limb—a hand, an the bird as a Magic action.

arm, a foot, a leg, or a similar body part. While the Fan (Uncommon). If you are on a boat or ship, you
prosthetic is attached, it functions identically to the can take a Magic action to toss the token up to 10
part it replaces. You can detach or reattach it as a feet in the air. The token disappears, and a giant,
Magic action, and it can't be removed against your flapping fan takes its place. The fan floats and cre-
will while you are alive ates a strong wind. This wind can fill the sails of one
ship, increasing its speed by 5 miles per hour for 8
hours. You can dismiss the fan as a Magic action.
Quaau's FEATHER TOKEN Swan Boat (Rare). You can take a Magic action to
Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies touch the token to a body of water at least 60 feet in
diameter. The token disappears, and a 50-foot-long,
This object looks like a feather. Different types of
20-foot-wide boat shaped like a swan takes its place.
feather tokens exist, each with a different single-use
The boat is self-propelled and moves across water
effect. The DM chooses the kind of token or deter-
at a speed of 6 miles per hour. You can take a Magic
mines it randomly by rolling on the Quaal's Feather
action while on the boat to command it to move or
‘Tokens table. The type of token determines its
to turn up to 90 degrees. The boat remains for 24
rarity.
hours and then disappears. You can dismiss the boat
Anchor (Uncommon). You can take a Magic action
asa Magic action.
to touch the token to a boat or ship. For the next
Tree (Uncommon). You must be outdoors to use
24 hours, the vessel can’t be moved by any means.
this token. You can take a Magic action to touch it
‘Touching the token to the vessel again ends the ef-
toan unoccupied space on the ground. The token
fect. When the effect ends, the token disappears.
disappears, andin its place a nonmagical oak tree
Bird (Rare). You can take a Magic action to toss
springs into existence. The tree is 60 feet tall and
the token 5 feet into the air. The token disappears
has a 5-foot-diameter trunk, and its branches at the
top spread out in a 20-foot radius.

Quase’s Fearwen
Toxen (Wwe)
Quaau's Fearmen
Toxen (Bia0)

Fearwen Toxen

(ancwor)

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Whip (Rare). You can take a Magic action to throw a Quarterstaff; the weapon will elongate only as far
the token to a point 10 feet ofyourself. The as the surrounding space allows.
token disappears, and a floating whip takes its place. In certain forms, the weapon has the following
You can then take a Bonus Action to make a melee additional properties.
spell attack against a creature within 10 feet of the Acrobatic Assist (Quarterstaff
or 10-Foot Pole
whip, with an attack bonus of +9. On a hit, the tar- Forms Only). While holding this weapon, you have
get takes 1d6 + 5 Force damage. Advantage on Dexterity (Acrobatics) checks.
‘As a Bonus Action, you can direct the whip to fly Attack Deflection (Quarterstaff
Form Only). When
up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a crea- you are hit by an attack while holding the weapon,
ture within 10 feet of the whip. The whip disappears you can take a Reaction to twirl the weapon around
after Lhour, when you take a Magic action to dis- you, gaining a +5 bonus to your Armor Class against
miss it, or when you die or have the Incapacitated the triggering attack, potentially causing the attack
condition. to miss you. You can’t use this property again until
you finish a Short or Long Rest.
Quaau’s FeaTHER TOKENS Ranged Weapon (Quarterstaff Form Only). This
1d100 Token Rarity weapon has the Thrown property with a normal
range of 30 feet and a long range of 120 feet. !m-
01-20 Anchor Uncommon
mediately after you make a ranged attack with the
21-35 Bird Rare weapon, it flies back to your hand.
36-50 Fan Uncommon.

51-65 Swanboat Rare
Quiver oF EHLONNA
66-90 Tree Uncommon. Wondrous Item, Uncommon
91-00 Whip Rare Each of the quiver’s three compartments connects
ton extradimensional space that allows the quiver
to hold numerous items while never weighing more
QUARTERSTAFF OF THE ACROBAT than 2 pounds. The shortest compartment can hold
Weapon (Quarterstaff), Very Rare (Requires up to 60 Arrows, Bolts, or similar objects. The mid-
Attunement) size compartment holds up to 18 Javelins or similar
objects. The longest compartment holds up to 6 long
You have a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
made with this magic weapon.
objects, such as bows, Quarterstaffs, or Spears.
You can draw any item the quiver contains as if
While holding this weapon, you can cause it to
doing so from a regular quiver or scabbard.
emit green Dim Light out to 10 feet, either as a Bo-
nus Action or after you roll Initiative, or you can
extinguish the light as a Bonus Action.
While holding this weapon, you can take a Bonus
Action to alter its form, turning it into a 6-inch rod
(for ease of storage) or a 10-foot pole, or reverting it

Quiver
oF

Enwonna

Quaai’s Fearnen
Toxen (Tass)

Quaa's Fearne
Toxen (Fan)

Quazrersrare
or tHe Acropar

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 291

Rine oF
Evemenrac
Commano (Ava)

Ring oF Awimac
Inpuence

Ring oF Duinns
Sumuonine

Every Ring of Elemental Command has the follow-
RING OF ANIMAL INFLUENCE ing two properties:

Ring, Rare Elemental Bane. While wearing the ring, you have
This ring has 3 charges, and it regains 143 expended Advantage on attack rolls against Elementals and
charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you they have Disadvantage on attack rolls against
can expend I charge to cast one ofthe following you.

spells (save DC 13) from it: Elemental Compulsion. While wearing the ring,
you can take a Magic action to try to compel an
+ Animal Friendship
Elemental you see within 60 feet of yourself. The
+ Fear (affects Beasts only)
Elemental makes a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw.
+ Speak with Animals
Ona failed save, the Elemental has the Charmed
condition until the start your next turn, and you
determine what it does with its move and action
Rio oF Dyrnnt SUMMONING
on its next turn.
Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement)

While wearing this ring, you can take a Magic Elemental Focus. While wearing the ring, you
action to summon a particular Djinni from the Ele- benefit from additional properties corresponding to

‘mental Plane ofAir. The djinni appears in an unoc- the ring’s linked Elemental Plane:

cupied space you choose within 120 feet of yourself. Air. You know Auran, you have Resistance to Light-
It remains as long
as you maintain Concentration, ning damage, and you have a Fly Speed equal to
toa maximum of| hour, or until it drops to O Hit your Speed and can hover,
Points. Earth. You know Terran, and you have Resistance
While summoned, the djinni is Friendly to you to Acid damage. Terrain composed of rubble,
and your allies, and it obeys your commands. If you rocks, or dirt isn't Difficult Terrain for you. In ad-
fail to command it, the djinni defends itself against dition, you can move through solid earth or rock
attackers but takes no other actions. as if those areas were Difficult Terrain without
After the djinni departs, it can't be summoned disturbing the matter through which you pass. If
again for 24 hours, and the ring becomes nonmagi- you end your turn in solid earth or rock, you are
cal if the djinni dies. shunted out to the nearest unoccupied space you
ings of Djinni Summoning are often created by the last occupied.
djinn they summon and given to mortals as gifts of Fire. You know Ignan, and you have Immunity to
friendship or tokens of esteem. Fire damage.
Water. You know Aquan, you gain a Swim Speed of
60 feet, and you can breathe underwater.
RING OF ELEMENTAL COMMAND
Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement) Spellcasting. The ring has 5 charges and regains
1d4 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. While
Each Ring of Elemental Command is linked to one of
wearing the ring, you can cast a spell from it.
the four Elemental Planes. The DM chooses or ran-
Choose the spell from the list of available spells,
domly determines the linked plane. For example, a
based on the Elemental Plane the ring is linked to,
Ring of Elemental Command (ait) is linked to the Ele-
as shown in the following table. The table indicates
mental Plane of Air.

292 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Ring oF
Invisiauuiry

Ring oF Mino
Smiesoine
Rine or Evasion
ine oF Fearwer
Faun

how many charges you must expend to cast the
spell, which has a save DC of 18. RING OF FREE ACTION
Plane Spells (Charges) Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement)

Air Chain Lightning (3 charges), Feather Fall While you wear this ring, Difficult Terrain doesn't
(0 charges), Gust of Wind (2 charges), cost you extra movement. In addition, magic can

Wind Wall (1 charge)
neither reduce any of your Speeds nor cause you to
have the Paralyzed or Restrained condition.
Earth Earthquake (5 charges), Stone Shape (2
charges), Stoneskin (3 charges), Wall of
Stone (3 charges) Ric oF INVISIBILITY
Fire Burning Hands (1 charge), Fireball (2 Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement)

charges), Fire Storm (4 charges), Wall of While wearing this ring, you can take a Magic ac-
Fire (3 charges) tion to give yourself the Invisible condition. You re-
main Invisible until the ring is removed or until you
Water Create or Destroy Water (1 charge), Ice
take a Bonus Action to become visible again.
Storm (2 charges), Tsunami (5 charges),
Wall of ce (3 charges), Water Walk (2
charges) RiNG oF JUMPING
Ring, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
While wearing this ring, you can cast Jump from it,
RING oF EVASION
but can target only yourself when you do so.
Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement)
This ring has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended
charges daily at dawn, When you fail a Dexterity RING OF MIND SHIELDING
saving throw while wearing the ring, you can take a Ring, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
Reaction to expend I charge to succeed on that save While wearing this ring, you are immune to magic
instead. that allows other creatures to read your thoughts,
determine whether you are lying, know your align-
ment, or know your creature type. Creatures can
RING OF FEATHER FALLING
telepathically communicate with you only if you
Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) allow it.
‘When you fall while wearing this ring, you descend You can take a Magic action to cause the ring to
60 feet per round and take no damage from falling. become imperceptible until you take another Magic
action to make it perceptible, until you remove the
ring, or until you die.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 293

inc
oF

Paorecrion

Shoring Srans

Ring oF

Recewenarion

If you die while wearing the ring, your soul enters
1d10 Damage Type Gemstone
it, unless it already houses a soul. You can remain in
1 Acid Pearl
the ring or depart for the afterlife. As long as your
soul is in the ring, you can telepathically commu- 2 Cold Tourmaline
nicate with any creature wearing it. A wearer can't, 3) Fire Garnet
prevent this telepathic communication.
4° Force Sapphire

5 Lightning Citrine
RING OF PROTECTION
6 Necrotic Jet
Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement)
7 Poison Amethyst
You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class and saving
throws while wearing this ring. 8 Psychic Jade

9 Radiant Topaz
10 Thunder Spinel
RING oF REGENERATION
Ring, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)

While wearing this ring, you regain 1d6 Hit Points RiNG OF SHOOTING STARS
every 10 minutes if you have at least 1 Hit Point. If Ring, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
you lose a body part, the ring causes the missing
You can cast Dancing Lights or Light from the ring,
part to regrow and return to full functionality
The ring has 6 charges and regains 1d6 expended
after 1d6 + 1 days if you have at least 1 Hit Point the
charges daily at dawn. You can expend its charges
whole time.
to use the properties below.
Faerie Fire. You can expend 1 charge to cast Faerie

RING OF RESISTANCE Fire from the ring.
Ring, Rare Lightning Spheres. You can expend 2 charges asa
‘Magic action to create up to four 3-foot-diameter
You have Resistance to one damage type while
spheres of lightning.
wearing this ring. The gemstone in the ring
Each sphere appears in an unoccupied space you
cates the type, which the DM chooses or determines
can see within 120 feet of yourself. The spheres
randomly by rolling on the following table.
last as long as you maintain Concentration, up to 1
minute. Each sphere sheds Dim Light in a 30-foot
radius.
Asa Bonus Action, you can move each sphere up
to 30 feet, but no farther than 120 feet away from
yourself. The first time the sphere comes within 5
feet of a creature other than you that isn't behind

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Rin oF
TeceKinesis
Rina oF Spec Rin oF Specs
Sroring Tuanine

‘Total Cover, the sphere discharges lightning at that expended without effect. The level of the slot used
creature and disappears. That creature makes a to cast the spell determines how much space it uses.
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the While wearing this ring, you can cast any spell
creature takes Lightning damage based on the num- storedin it. The spell uses the slot level, spell save
ber of spheres you created, as shown in the follow- DC, spell attack bonus, and spellcasting ability of
ing table. On a successful save, the creature takes the original caster but is otherwise treated as if you
half as much damage. cast the spell. The spell cast from the ring is no lon-
ger stored in it, freeing up space.
Number
of Lightning Number
of Lightning
Spheres Damage Spheres Damage
1 4d12 3 2d6 RING OF SPELL TURNING
z 5d4 4 2d4 Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement)
While wearing this ring, you have Advantage on
Shooting Stars. You can expend | to 3 charges
saving throws against spells. If you succeed on the
as a Magic action. For every charge you expend,
save for a spell of level 7 or lower, the spell has no
you launch a glowing mote of light from the ring
effect on you. If that spell targeted only you and
at a point you can see within 60 feet ofyourself.
didn't create an area of effect, you can take a Reac-
Each creature in a 15-foot Cube originating from
tion to deflect the spell back at the spell’s caster; the
that point is showered in sparks and makes a DC 15
caster must make a saving throw against the spell
Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d4 Radiant damage
using their own spell save DC.
ona failed save or half
as much damage on a suc-
cessful one.

RING OF SWIMMING
Ring, Uncommon
RING OF SPELL STORING
Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) You have a Swim Speed of 40 feet while wearing
this ring.
‘This ring stores spells cast into it, holding them un-
til the attuned wearer uses them. The ring can store
up to 5 levels worth of spells at a time. When found,
RING OF TELEKINESIS
it contains 1d6 - 1 levels of stored spells chosen by
Ring, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
the DM.
Any creature can cast a spell of level 1 through 5 While wearing this ring, you can cast Telekinesis
into the ring by touching the ring as the spell is cast. from it.
‘The spell has no effect other than to be stored in
the ring. If the ring can’t hold the spell, the spell is

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 295

Rine oF Wares
Warxing

Ring oF
Twace Wisnes
Ring oF
Wanner

RING OF THE RAM RING OF WATER WALKING
Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) Ring, Uncommon

This ring has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended While wearing this ring, you cast Water Walk from
charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you it, targeting only yourself.
can take a Magic action to expend I to 3 charges
to make a ranged spell attack against one creature
you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The ring RING OF X-Ray VISION
produces a spectral ram’s head and makes its attack Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement)
roll with a +7 bonus. On a hit, for each charge you While wearing this ring, you can take a Magic ac-
spend, the target takes 2d10 Force damage and is tion to gain X-ray vision with a range of 30 feet for
pushed 5 feet away from you.
1 minute. To you, solid objects within that radius ap-
Alternatively, you can expend
I to 3 of the ring’s pear transparent and don't prevent light from pass-
charges as a Magic action to try to break a nonmag- ing through them. The vision can penetrate 1 foot
ical object you can see 60 feet of yourself
of stone, l inch of common metal, or up to 3 feet of
that isn't being worn or carried. The ring makes
wood or dirt. Thicker substances or a thin sheet of
a Strength check with a +5 bonus for each charge lead block the vision
you spend.
Whenever you use the ring again before taking a
Long Rest, you must succeed on a DC 15 Constitu-
tion saving throw or gain 1 Exhaustion level.
Rino oF Taree WISHES
Ring, Legendary

While wearing this ring, you can expend 1 of its 3 Riva Coin
charges to cast Wish from it. The ring becomes non- Wondrous Item, Common
magical when you use the last charge. This gold coin has a creature embossed on each side.
The two depicted creatures must be famous rivals
or enemies of each other. For example, a Rival Coin
RING OF WARMTH
might show Iggwilv on one side and Mordenkainen
Ring, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
on the other, or Venger on one side and Tiamat on
If you take Cold damage while wearing this ring, the the other. One of these figures is on the “heads” side
ring reduces the damage you take by 2d8. of the coin, the other on the “tails” side.
In addition, while wearing this ring, you and ‘The coin has 1 charge and regains its expended
everything you wear and carry are unharmed by charge daily at dawn. You can take a Magic action
temperatures of 0 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. to toss the coin, expending its charge. Roll any die
to determine whether the coin comes up heads (on
an even number) or tails (on an odd number). The
roll also determines the effect:

296 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Heads. Target one creature you can see within 60 Rin oF

feet of yourself, The target makes a DC 13 Wis- X-ray Vision

dom saving throw. On a failed save, the target
takes 2d4 Psychic damage and has Disadvantage
on the next attack roll it makes before the end
of its next turn. On a successful save, the target
takes half as much damage only.
Tails. You take 1d4 Psychic damage.

Rose or Eyes
Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)

This robe is adorned with eyelike patterns. While
you wear the robe, you gain the following benefits: Rivae Coins.

All-Around Vision. The robe gives you Advantage
on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Special Senses. You have Darkvision and Truesight,
both with a range of 120 feet

Drawbacks. A Light spell cast on the robe or a Day-
light spell cast within 5 feet of the robe gives you the
Blinded condition for1 minute. At the end of each of
your turns, you make a Constitution saving throw
(DC 11 for Light or DC 15 for Daylight), ending the
condition on yourself on a success.

Rose OF SCINTILLATING COLORS
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)

This robe has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended
charges daily at dawn. While you wear it, you can
take a Magic action and expend I charge to cause
the garment to display a shifting pattern of dazzling
hues until the end of your next turn, During this
, the robe sheds Bright Light in a 30-foot radius
and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet, and crea-
tures that can see you have Disadvantage on attack
rolls against you. Any creature in the Bright Light
that can see you when the robe's power is activated
must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or
have the Stunned condition until the effect ends.

Rose oF STARS
Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)

This black or dark-blue robe is embroidered with
small white or silver stars. You gain a +1 bonus to
saving throws while you wear it.
Six stars, located on the robe's upper-front por-
tion, are particularly large. While wearing this
robe, you can take a Magic action to remove one of
the stars and expend it to cast the level 5 version of
Magic Missile. Daily at dusk, 1d6 removed stars reap-
pear on the robe.
While you wear the robe, you can take a Magic
action to enter the Astral Plane along with

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Rove oF THe
Ancrmasi

Rose or
Useru Trews

everything you are wearing and carrying. You re-
main there until you take a Magic action to return Rose OF UsEFuL ITEMS
to the plane you were on. You reappear in the last Wondrous Item, Uncommon
space you occupied or, if that space is occupied, the
This robe has cloth patches ofvarious shapes and
nearest unoccupied space.
colors covering it. While wearing the robe, you can
take a Magic action to detach one of the patches,

ROBE OF THE ARCHMAGI causing it to become the object or creature it rep-
resents. Once the last patch is removed, the robe
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement
by a
becomes an ordinary garment.
Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard)
‘The robe has two of each of the following patches:
‘This elegant garment is made from exquisite cloth
and adorned with runes. + Bullseye Lantern (filled and lit)
You gain these benefits while wearing the robe. + Dagger
Armor. If you aren't wearing armor, your base + Mirror

Armor Class is 15 plus your Dexterity modifier. + Pole
Magic Resistance. You have Advantage on saving + Rope (coiled)
throws against spells and other magical effects. + Sack
War Mage. Your spell save DC and spell attack bo- In addition, the robe has 4d4 other patches. The DM
nus each increase by 2. chooses the patches or determines them randomly
by rolling on the following table.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Rovor
Aasororion
it are wasted. The rod can absorb and store up to
50 levels of energy over the course ofits existence.
‘Once the rod absorbs 50 levels of energy, it can’t ab-
sorb more. If you are targeted by a spell that the rod
can't store, the rod has no effect on that spell.
When you become attuned to the rod, you know
how many levels of energy the rod has absorbed
over the course of its existence and how many levels
ofspell energy it currently has stored.
14100 Patch
If you are a spellcaster holding the rod, you can
01-08 Bag of 100 GP convert energy stored in it into spell slots to cast
09-15 Silver coffer (1 foot long, 6 inches wide and spells you have prepared or know. You can create

deep) worth 500 GP spell slots only of a level equal to or lower than your
‘own spell slots, up to a maximum of level 5. You use
16-22. Iron door (up to 10 feet wide and 10 feet
the stored levels in place ofyour slots but otherwise
high, barred on one side of your choice), cast the spell as normal. For example, you can use 3
which you can place in an opening you can levels stored in the rod as a level 3 spell slot.
reach; it conforms to fit the opening, attach- Annewly found rod typically has 1410 levels of
ing and hinging itself spell energy stored in it. A rod that can no longer

23-30 10 gems worth 100 GP each absorb spell energy and has no energy remaining
becomes nonmagical.
31-44 Wooden ladder (24 feet long)
45-51 Riding Horse with a Riding Saddle
Rop OF ALERTNESS
52-59 Open pit (a 10-foot Cube), which you
Rod, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
can place on the ground within 10 feet of
yourself This rod has the following properties.
Alertness. While holding the rod, you have
60-68 4 Potions of Healing
Advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks and on
69-75 Rowboat (12 feet long) Initiative rolls.
76-83. Spell Scroll cont ing one spell of level 1, 2, Spells. While holding the rod, you can cast the fol

or 3 (your choice) lowing spells from it:

84-90 2 Mastiffs + Detect Evil and Good
+ Detect Magic
91-96 Window (2 feet by 4 feet, up to 2 feet deep),
+ Detect Poison and Disease
which you can place on a vertical surface
+ See Invisibility
you can reach
Protective Aura. As a Magic action, you can plant
97-00 Portable Ram
the haft end of the rod in the ground, whereupon
the rod’s head sheds Bright Light in a 60-foot radius
and Dim Light for an additional 60 feet. While
Rop oF ABSORPTION
in that Bright Light, you and your allies gain a +1
Rod, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) bonus to Armor Class and saving throws and can
While holding this rod, you can take a Reaction to sense the location of any Invisible creature that is,
absorb a spell that is targeting only you and doesn't also in the Bright Light.
create an area of effect. The absorbed spell's effect is ‘The rod’s head stops glowing and the effect ends,
canceled, and the spell’s energy—not the spell itself after 10 minutes or when a creature takes a Magic
is stored in the rod. The energy has the same level action to pull the rod from the ground. Once used,
as the spell when it was cast. A canceled spell dissi- this property can't be used again until the next
pates with no effect, and any resources used to cast dawn.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 299,

Button 1. A fiery blade sprouts from the
Rop or LorpLy MicuT site the rod’s flanged head. The flames =

| This rod has a flanged head, and it functions as a
Rod, Legendary (Requires Attunement) Light in a 40-foot radius and Dim Liste
additional 40 feet, and the blade
magic Longsword or Shortsword (yaa =
magic Mace that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls
that deals an extra 2d6 Fire damaze om=
i and damage rolls made with it. The rod has proper-
Button 2. The rod’s flanged head folds a=
! ties associated with six different buttons that are set
two crescent-shaped blades spring out =
} in a row along the haft. It has three other properties
ing the rod into a magic Battleaxe that
as well, detailed below. +3 bonus to attack rolls and damaze rails
Buttons. You can press one ofthe following but-
with it,
tons as a Bonus Action; a button's effect lasts until
Button 3. The rod's flanged head folds
you push a different button or until you push the
spear point springs from the rod’s tip. amt
same button again, which causes the rod to revert
rod’s handle lengthens into a 6-foot ha
to its normal form:
forming the rod into a magic Spear that =
+3 bonus to attack rolls and damaze rails
with it.
Button 4, The rod transforms into 2
Rov or up to 50 feet long (you specify the lene
| Reverso the rod's buttons remain within your
surfaces as hard as granite, a spike 2 the
tom and three hooks at the top anchor
Horizontal bars 3 inches long fold out
sides, 1 foot apart, forming
a ladder. The
bear up to 4,000 pounds. More weiss
of solid anchoring causes the rod to
normal form.
Roo or Button 5. The rod transforms into 2 bend
Lorouy Miner battering ram and grants its user 2 20)
to Strength (Athletics) checks mad= ®5
through doors, barricades, and other
Button 6. The rod assumes or remains =
Rov or
mal form and indicates magnetic nor
y Resuanecrion
happensif this function of the rod
location that has no magnetic north.) T
gives you knowledge ofyour appros
beneath the ground or your height sbow=

Drain Life. When you hit a creature
attack using the rod, you can force the
make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw
save, the target takes an extra 4d6 Ns
age, and you regain a number of Hit
half that Necrotic damage. Once used.
can't be used again until the next d=.
Paralyze. When you hit a creature w=
tack using the rod, you can force the ©
Rove oF a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. O= =
Enrancuenenr
the target has the Paralyzed condition Sax
=
The target repeats the save at the end of
turns, ending the effect on a success. One
this property can’t be used again until She
dawn.
Terrify. While holding the rod, you cam
Magic action to force each creature yom
within 30 feet of yourself
tomake 2 DOS
saving throw. On a failed save, 2 tarce® &

3OO CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Frightened condition for 1 minute. A Frightened location they occupied when you activated the rod
target repeats the save at the end of each of its or an unoccupied space nearest that location. Once
turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success. Once used, this property can't be used again until 10 days
used, this property can't be used again until the have passed.
next dawn,

Rop oF THE Pact KEEPER
Rop OF RESURRECTION Rod, Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+5)
Rod, Legendary (Requires Attunement) (Requires Attunement by a Warlock)
‘The rod has 5 charges. While you hold it, you can While holding this rod, you gain a bonus to spell
cast one ofthe following spells from it: Heal (ex- attack rolls and to the saving throw DCs of your
pends I charge) or Resurrection (expends 5 charges). Warlock spells. The bonus is determined by the
‘The rod regains 1 expended charge daily at dawn. rod's rarity.
Ifyou expend the last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the In addition, you can regain one spell slot as a
rod disappears in a harmless burst of radiance. Magic action while holding the rod. You can’t use
this property again until you finish a Long Rest.

Rop oF RULERSHIP
Rod, Rare (Requires Attunement) Rope OF CLIMBING
You can take a Magic action to present the rod and Wondrous Item, Uncommon

‘command obedience from each creature of your This 60-foot length of rope can hold up to 3,000
choice that you can see within 120 feet of your- pounds. While holding one end of the rope, you can
self. Each target must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom take a Magic action to command the other end of
saving throw or have the Charmed condition for 8 the rope to animate and move toward a destination
hours. While Charmed in this way, the creature re- you choose, up to the rope’s length away from you.
gards you as its trusted leader. If harmed by you or ‘That end moves 10 feet on your turn when you first
your allies or commanded to do something contrary ‘command it and 10 feet at the start ofeach of your
to its nature, a target ceases to be Charmed in this subsequent turns until reaching its destination or
way. Once used, this property can't be used again until you tell it to stop. You can also tell the rope
until the next dawn. to fasten itself securely to an object orto unfasten
itself, to knot or unknot itself, or to coil itself for
carrying.
Rop oF SECURITY If you tell the rope to knot, large knots appear at
Rod, Very Rare 1foot intervals along the rope. While knotted, the

While holding this rod, you can take a Magic action rope shortens to a 50-foot length and grants Advan-
to activate it. The rod then instantly transports you tage on ability checks made to climb using the rope.
and up to 199 other willing creatures you can see The rope has AC 20, HP 20, and Immunity to Poi-
toa demiplane. You choose the form the demiplane son and Psychic damage. It regains 1 Hit Point every

takes. It could be a tranquil garden, a cheery tavern, 5 minutes as long as it has at least 1 Hit Point. If the
an immense palace, a tropical island, a fantastic car- rope drops to 0 Hit Points, it is destroyed.
nival, or whatever else you can imagine. Regardless
of its nature, the demiplane contains enough water
and food to sustain its visitors, and the demiplane's Rope OF ENTANGLEMENT
environment can't harm its occupants. Everything Wondrous Item, Rare

else that can be interacted with there can exist only This rope is 30 feet long. While holding one end of
there. For example, a flower picked from a garden the rope, you can take a Magic action to command
there disappears if itis taken outside the demiplane. the other end to dart forward and entangle one
For each hour spent in the demiplane, a visitor creature you can see within 20 feet of yourself. The
regains Hit Points as if it had spent 1 Hit Point Die. target must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving
Also, creatures don't age while there, although time throw or have the Restrained condition. You can re-
passes normally. Visitors can remain there for up to lease the target by letting go of your end of the rope
200 days divided by the number ofcreatures pres- (causing the rope to coil up in the target's space)
ent (round down). or by using a Bonus Action to repeat the command
When the time runs out or you take a Magic ac- (causing the rope to coil up in your hand).
tion to end the effect, all visitors reappear in the

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE OT

A target Restrained by the rope can take an action
to make its choice ofa DC 15 Strength (Athletics) or
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. On a successful check,
the target is no longer Restrained by the rope. If
you're still holding onto the rope when a target es-
capes from it, you can take a Reaction to command
the rope to coil up in your hand; otherwise, the rope
coils up in the target's space.
The rope has AC 20, HP 20, and Immunity to Poi-
son and Psychic damage. It regains 1 Hit Point every
5 minutes as long as it has at least 1 Hit Point. If the
rope drops to 0 Hit Points, itis destroyed.

ROPE OF MENDING
Wondrous Item, Common

This 50-foot coil of rope can repair itself when cut
Scanan
or
into any number of smaller pieces. As a Magic ac-
Prorecrion
tion, you can cause all pieces of the rope that are in
contact with each other and not otherwise in use
to knit back together. A Rope of Mending is forever
shortened if a section of itis lost or destroyed.

Ruby OF THE WAR MacE
can take a Reaction to expend I charge and turn
Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement by
a the failed save into a successful one. The scarab
Spelicaster) crumbles into powder and is destroyed when its last,
Etched with eldritch runes, this I-inch-diameter charge is expended.
ruby allows you to use a Simple or Martial weapon Spell Resistance, You have Advantage on saving
asa Spellcasting Focus for your spells. For this throws against spells.
property to work, you must attach the ruby to the
weapon by pressing the ruby against it for at least
10 minutes. Thereafter, the ruby can't be removed ScIMITAR OF SPEED
unless you detach it as a Magic action, the weapon. Weapon (Scimitar), Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
is destroyed, or your Attunement to the ruby ends. You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
made with this magic weapon. In addition, you can
make one attack with it as a Bonus Action on each
SADDLE OF THE CAVALIER
of your turns.
Wondrous Item, Uncommon

‘This saddle confers the following benefits while you
are seated in it and astride a mount. SCROLL OF PROTECTION
Protected Mount. Attack rolls against the mount Scroll, Rare
have Disadvantage. Each Scroll of Protection works against creatures of
Secure Rider. You can’t be dismounted against a specific creature type chosen by the DM or deter-
your will. This property is suppressed while you mined by rolling on the following table.
have the Incapacitated condition.
1d100 Creature Type 14100 Creature Type
01-10 Aberrations 51-60 Fey
SCARAB OF PROTECTION
11-15 Beasts 61-70 Fiends
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement)
16-20 Celestials 7-75 Giants
This beetle-shaped medallion provides three bene-
fits while it is on your person. 21-25 Constructs 76-80 Monstrosities

Defense. You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. 26-35 Dragons 81-85 Oozes
Preservation. The scarab has 12 charges. If you
36-45 Elementals 86-90 Plants
fail a saving throw against a Necromancy spell or
a harmful effect originating from an Undead, you 46-50 Humanoids 91-00 Undead

302 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Scimiran oF
Speco

Serou oF

Prorecrion

Senoine Stones

Using a Magic action to read the scroll creates a
inating from you. For 5 min-
utes, creatures of the specified type can’t enter or
affect anything in the area, However, if you move
in such a way that a creature of the specified type
SENDING STONES
‘would be inside the area, the effect ends.
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
Asa Magic action, a creature within 5 feet of the
Emanation can attempt to overcome it, which forces Sending Stones come in pairs, with each stone carved
the creature to make a DC 15 Charisma saving to match the other so the pairing is easily recog-
throw. On a successful save, the creature ceases to nized. While you touch one stone, you can cast

be affected by the Emanation. Sending from it. The target is the bearer of the other
stone. If no creature bears the other stone, you
know that fact as soon as you use the stone, and you
ScROLL OF TITAN SUMMONING don’t cast the spell.
Scroll, Legendary Once Sending is cast using either stone, the stones
can't be used again until the next dawn. If one of the
When you take a Magic action to read this scroll,
stones in a pair is destroyed, the other one becomes
a particular titan named in the scroll appears in an
nonmagical.
unoccupied space on the ground or in water that
you can see within 1 mile of yourself. The DM picks
a suitable titan or determines it randomly by rolling
SENTINEL SHIELD
on the table below (see the Monster Manual for the
Armor (Shield), Uncommon
creature's stat block).
The titan is Hostile toward all other creatures and While holding this Shield, you have Advantage on
disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points. Ifthe titan Initiative rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks.
is summoned into a space that isn't large enough The Shield is emblazoned with a symbol of an eye.
to contain it, the summoning fails, and the scroll
is wasted.
SuiELp, +1, +2, or +3
14100 Titan Armor (Shield), Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare
01-15. Animal Lord (63)
16-30 Blob ofAnnihilation While holding this Shield, you have a bonus to Ar-
mor Class determined by the Shield’s rarity, in addi-
31-45. Colossus
tion to the Shield’s normal bonus to AC.
46-60 Elemental Cataclysm
61-75 Empyrean
SHIELD OF EXPRESSION
76-90 Kraken (a kraken requires a body of water
Armor (Shield), Common
large enough to contain it, or the summon-
ing fails and the scroll is wasted) ‘The front of this Shield is shaped in the likeness
of a face. While bearing the Shield, you can take a
91-00 Tarrasque
Bonus Action to alter the face's expression.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 303

Protective Field. As a Reaction, when you or an
SHIELD OF MISSILE ATTRACTION ally you can see within 5 feet ofyou is targeted by
Armor (Shield), Rare (Requires Attunement) an attack or makes a saving throw against an area
of effect, you can use the Shield to create an immo-
While holding this Shield, you have Resistance to
bile 5-foot Emanation originating from you. When
damage from attacks made with Ranged weapons.
Curse. This Shield is cursed. Attuning to it curses
the Emanation appears, any creatures or objects not
fully contained within it are pushed into the nearest
you until you are targeted by a Remove Curse spell or
unoccupied spaces outside it. The attack or area of
similar magic. Removing the Shield fails to end the
curse on you. Whenever an attack with a Ranged
effect that triggered the Reaction has no effect on
creatures and objects inside the Emanation, which
weapon targets a creature within 10 feet ofyou, the
lasts as long as you maintain Concentration, up to
curse causes you to become the target instead,
1 minute. Nothing can pass into or out of the Ema-
nation. A creature or object inside the Emanation
SHIELD OF THE CAVALIER can't be damaged by attacks or effects originating

‘Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
from outside, nor can a creature inside the Emana-
tion damage anything outside it. Once this property
While holding this Shield, you have a +2 bonus
is used, it can't be used again until the next dawn.
to Armor Class. This bonus is in addition to the
Shield’s normal bonus to AC.
The Shield has the following additional properties SILVERED WEAPON
that you can use while holding it.
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Common
Forceful Bash. When you take the Attack action,
An alchemical process has bonded silver to th
you can make one of the attack rolls using the
magic weapon. When you score a Critical Hit with it
Shield against a target within 5 feet of yourself.
against a creature that is shape-shifted, the weapon
Apply your Proficiency Bonus and Strength mod-
deals one additional die of damage.
ifier to the attack roll. On a hit, the Shield deals
Force damage to the target equal to 2d6 + 2 plus
your Strength modifier, and if the target is a crea-
SLIPPERS OF SPIDER CLIMBING
ture, you can push it up to 10 feet directly away
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
from yourself. If the creature is your size or smaller,
you can also knock it down, giving it the Prone While you wear these light shoes, you can move
up, down, and across vertical surfaces and along

Swueso oF Misenne

Arresction
Smeco or

rae Cavavien

Spetauano
Swieco
304 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

ceilings, while leaving your hands free. You have a
Climb Speed equal to your Speed. However, the slip- SPELL SCROLL
pers don't allow you to move this way on a slippery Scroll, Rarity Varies
surface, such as one covered by ice or oil. {A Spell Scroll bears the words of a single spell, writ-
ten in a mystical cipher. If the spell is on your spell
list, you can read the scroll and cast its spell without
SMOLDERING ARMOR Material components. Otherwise, the scroll is unin-
‘Armor (Any Heavy, Medium, or Light), Common telligible. Casting the spell by reading the scroll re~
Wisps of harmless, odorless smoke rise from this quires the spell’s normal casting time. Once the spell
armor while itis worn. is cast, the scroll crumbles to dust. If the casting is
interrupted, the scroll isn’t lost
If the spell is on your spell list but of a higher level
SOVEREIGN GLUE than you can normally cast, you make an ability
Wondrous Item, Legendary check using your spelleasting ability to determine
‘This viscous, milky-white substance can form a per~ whether you cast the spell. The DC equals 10 plus
manent adhesive bond between any two objects. It the spell’s level. On a failed check, the spell disap-
must be stored in a jar or flask that has been coated pears from the scroll with no other effect.
inside with Oil of Slipperiness. When found, a con- The level of the spell on the scroll determines the
tainer contains 1d6 + 1 ounces. spell's saving throw DC and attack bonus, as well as
‘One ounce of the glue can cover a I-foot square the scroll’s rarity, as shown in the following table.
surface. Applying an ounce of Sovereign Glue takes a Spell Level. Ri Save DC Attack Bonus
Utilize action, and the applied glue takes 1 minute to Cantrip Common B +5
set. Once it has done so, the bond it creates can be +5
B
broken only by the application of Universal Solvent 1 Common
or Oil of Etherealness, or with a Wish spell. 2 Uncommon 13 +5
3 Uncommon 15 +7

SPELLGUARD SHIELD 4 Rare ary 47
‘Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) 5 Rare v +9
While holding this Shield, you have Advantage 6 Very Rare WV 49
on saving throws against spells and other magical Very Rare 8 +10
7
effects, and spell attack rolls have Disadvantage
8 Very Rare 8 +10
against you.
9 Legendary 19 an

Spee
Supers oF
Serout
Spioen Cumaine

Sovencion

CHAPTER

Anninicarion
of the sphere. On a failed check, the sph
ere moves
10 feet toward you in a straight line,
While in control of the sphere, you can take
a
Bonus Action to cause it to move in one
direction
of your choice, up to a number of feet equal to
5 times your Intelligence modifier
(minimum 5
feet). Any creature whose space the sphere
enters
must succeed on a DC 19 Dexterity savi
ng throw
or be touched by it, taking 8410 Force damage.
A
creature reduced to 0 Hit Points
by this damage is
obliterated, leaving its possessions beh
ind but no
other physical remains.
Sphere Interactions. If the sphere comes into con-
tact with a planar portal (such as tha
t created by
the Gate spell) or an extradimensional spa
ce (such
as that within a Portable Hole), the DM det
ermines
randomly what happens using the fol
lowing table.
1100 Result

01-50 The sphere is destroyed.
51-85 The sphere moves through the portal or
into the extradimensional space.

86-00 A spatial rift sends the sphere and
each
creature and object within 180 feet
of the
sphere to a random plane of existence,

Sprrit Boarp
Copying Wondrous Item, Very Rare
a Scroll into a Spellbook. A Wizard spell
on a Spell Scroll can be copied into a spel This ornate wooden board has the lett
lboo k. ers of the
‘When a spell is copied in this way, the copier must Common alphabet printed on one side,
alongside
succeed on an Intelligence (Arcana) the words “Yes” and “No” and symbols rep
check with a resenting
DC equal to 10 plus the spell's level. On “Weal” and “Woe.” The board comes wit
a successful h a heart-
check, the spell is copied. Whether the che shaped, wooden planchette. This planch
ck suc- ette must
ceeds or fails, the Spell Scroll is destroyed. be resting on the lettered side of the boa
rd for the
board's magic to function.
This board has 3 charges and regains 1 expend
ed
SPHERE OF ANNIHILATION charge daily at dawn. While touching the
planch-
Wondrous Item, Legendary ette, you can take 1 minute to cast
one of the spells
This 2-foot-diameter black sphere is a ‘on the table below. The table indicates
hole in the how many
multiverse, hovering in space and stabilized charges you must expend to cast the spel
by a l. As you
magical field surrounding it. cast the spell, you call on the spirits
ofthe dead to
The sphere obliterates all matter it pas guide the planchette across the board'
ses through s surface,
and all matter that passes through it. Artifacts answering your questions by
pointing to the letters
are
the exception. Unless an Artifact is suscepti or words on the board.
ble
to damage from a Sphere of Annihila
tion, it passes Spell Charge Cost
through the sphere unscathed. Anything
touches the sphere but isn't wholly engulfed
else that Augury 1
and
obliterated by it takes 8d10 Force damage Commune 3
.
Controlling the Sphere. A Sphere of Annihi
lation is
stationary until someone takes control of it. If you
are within 60 feet ofa sphere, you can
take a Magic STAFF OF ADORNMENT
action to make a DC 25 Intell Staff, Common
igence (Arcana) check.
Ona successful check, you control the sphere
until Ifyou place a Tiny object weighing no mor
the start of your next turn, and e than 1
if it was under an- Pound (such as a shard of crystal, an egg,
other creature's control, that creatu or a stone)
re loses control above the tip of this staff while hol
ding it, the object

306 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Stare oF Fine p

STAFF oF Cuananing

floats a inch from the staff's tip and remains there
until itis removed or until the staff is no longer in
Serair Boaso
your possession. The staff can have up to three such
objects floating over its tip at any given time. While
holding the staff, you can make one or more of the
objects slowly spin or turn in place.

STAFF OF BIRDCALLS
Staff, Common

This wooden staff
is decorated with bird carvings.
Ithas 10 charges. While holding it, you can take a
Magic action to expend I charge from the staff and
cause it to create one of the following sounds, which
can be heard out to 120 feet: a finch’s chirp, a ra-
ven’s caw, a duck’s quack, a chicken’s cluck, a goose’s
honk, a loon's call, a turkey’s gobble, a seagull’s cry,
an owl's hoot, or an eagle's shriek
Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex-
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the
last charge, roll 1d20. On a, the staff explodes in a
harmless cloud of bird feathers and is lost forever.

STAFF OF CHARMING
Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Bard, Cleric,
Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard)
This staff has 10 charges. While holding the staff, STAFF OF FIRE
you can use any ofits properties: Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement
by a Druid,
Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard)
Cast Spell. You can expend 1 ofthe staff's charges
to cast Charm Person, Command, or Comprehend You have Resistance to Fire damage while you hold
Languages from it using your spell save DC. this staff,
Reflect Enchantment. If you succeed on a saving Spells. The staff has 10 charges. While holding the
throw against an Enchantment spell that targets staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following.
only you, you can take a Reaction to expend 1 table from it, using your spell save DC. The table in-
charge from the staff and turn the spell back on dicates how many charges you must expend to cast
its caster as if you had cast the spell. the spell.
Resist Enchantment. If you fail a saving throw
Charge Charge
against an Enchantment spell that targets only Spell Cost Spell Cost
you, you can turn your failed save into a success-
Burning Hands 1 Wall of Fire 4
ful one. You can’t use this property of the staff
again until the next dawn. Fireball 3
Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d8 + 2 ex- Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex-
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the
charge, roll 1420, On a 1, the staff crumbles to dust last charge, roll 1420, On a 1, the staff crumbles into
and is destroyed. \ders and is destroyed.

CHAPTER 7| TREASURE 307

Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex-
STAFF OF FLOWERS pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last
Staff, Common charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the staff vanishes in a flash
‘This wooden staff has 10 charges. While holding of light, lost forever.
it, you can take a Magic action to expend I charge
from the staff and cause a flower to sprout from a
patch of earth or soil within 5 feet of yourself, or STAFF OF POWER
from the staff itself. Unless you choose a specific Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Sorcerer,
Warlock, or Wizard)
kind of flower, the staff creates a mild-scented
daisy. The flower is harmless and nonmagical, and it ‘This staff has 20 charges and can be wielded as a
grows or withers as a normal flower would. magic Quarterstaff
that grants a +2 bonus to attack
Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- rolls and damage rolls made with it. While hold-
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last ing it, you gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class, saving
charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the staff turns into flower throws, and spell attack rolls.
petals and is lost forever. Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of,
the spells on the following table from it, using your
spell save DC. The table indicates how many charges
STAFF OF FROST you must expend to cast the spell.
Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by
Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard)
a Druid,
Spell Charge Cost
Cone of Cold 5
You have Resistance to Cold damage while you hold
Fireball (level 5 version)

aunuau
this staff.
Spells. The staff has 10 charges. While holding the Globe of invulnerability
staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following
Hold Monster
table from it, using your spell save DC. The table in-
dicates how many charges you must expend to cast, Levitate
the spell. Lightning Bolt (level 5 version)
Charge Charge Magic Missile
Spell Cost Spell Cost Ray of Enfeeblement

wo
Cone of Cold 5 Ice Storm 4
Wall of Force
Fog Cloud 1 Wall of ice 4
Regaining Charges. The staff regains 248 + 4 ex-
Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the staff retains its +2
charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the staff turns to water bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls but loses all
and is destroyed. other properties. On a 20, the staff regains 1d8 + 2
charges.
Retributive Strike. You can take a Magic action
Starr OF HEALING to break the staff over your knee or against a solid
Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Bard, Cleric, or surface. The staff
is destroyed and releases its magic
Druid) in an explosion that fills a 30-foot Emanation orig
This staff has 10 charges. While holding the staff, inating from itself. You have a 50 percent chance
you can cast one of the spells on the following table to instantly travel to a random plane of existence,
from it, using your spellcasting ability modifier. The avoiding the explosion. If you fail to avoid the effect,
table indicates how many charges you must expend you take Force damage equal to 16 times the num-
to cast the spell. ber of charges in the staff. Each other creature in
the area makes a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. On
Spell Charge Cost
a failed save, a creature takes Force damage equal to
Cure Wounds 1 charge per spell level 4 times the number of charges in the staff. On a suc
(maximum 4 for a cessful save, a creature takes half as much damage.
level 4 spell)

Lesser Restoration 2

Mass Cure Wounds 5

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

*

Starr OF STRIKING
Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)

This staff can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff
that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage
rolls made with it.
‘The staff has 10 charges. When you hit with
amelee attack using it, you can expend up to 3
charges. For each charge you expend, the target
takes an extra 1d6 Force damage.
Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex-
Starr oF
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last Swarming

charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the staff becomes a non- Insects

magical Quarterstaff.

Srarr OF SWARMING INSECTS
Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Bard, Cleric,
Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard)
This staff has 10 charges.
Insect Cloud. While holding the staff, you can
take a Magic action and expend1 charge to cause
a swarm of harmless flying insects to fill a 30-foot
Emanation originating from you. The insects re-
main for 10 minutes, making the area Heavily Ob-
scured for creatures other than you. A strong wind
(like that created by Gust of Wind) disperses the
swarm and ends the effect.
Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of
the spells on the following table from it, using your
spell save DC and spell attack modifier. The table in-
dicates how many charges you must expend to cast
the spell.
Spell Charge Cost
Giant Insect 4 Starr oF

Flowers
Insect Plague 5

Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex-
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last
charge, roll 1420. On a 1, a swarm of insects con-
sumes and destroys the staff, then disperses.

STAFF OF THE ADDER
Staff, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
As a Bonus Action, you can turn the head of this
staff into that of an animate, venomous snake for1
minute or revert the staff
to its inanimate form. Stare oF
‘When you take the Attack action, you can make Heaune

one of the attack rolls using the animated snake Starr oF

head, which has a reach of 5 feet. Apply your Pro- Powen

ficiency Bonus and Wisdom modifier to the attack
roll. On a hit, the target takes 1d6 Piercing damage
and 3d6 Poison damage.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 309

‘The snake head can be attacked while it is ani- Starr or
mate. It has AC 15, HP 20, and Immunity to Poison THe Aover
and Psychic damage. If the head drops to 0 Hit
Points, the staff is destroyed. As long as it’s not de-
stroyed, the staff regains all lost Hit Points when it
reverts to its inanimate form.
Starr oF

STAFF OF THE MAGI
Staff, Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Sorcerer,
Warlock, or Wizard)

This staff has 50 charges and can be wielded as a
magic Quarterstaff
that grants a +2 bonus to attack
rolls and damage rolls made with it. While you hold Starr OF THE
it, you gain a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls.
Spell Absorption. While holding the staff, you
have Advantage on saving throws against spells.
In addition, you can take a Reaction when another
creature casts a spell that targets only you. If you
do, the staff absorbs the magic of the spell, cancel-
ing its effect and gaininga number of charges equal
to the absorbed spell’s level. However, if doing so
brings the staff’s total number of charges above 50,
the staff explodes as if you activated its Retributive
Strike (see below).
Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of
the spells on the following table from it, using your
spell save DC. The table indicates how many charges
you must expend to cast the spell.

Spell Charge Cost
Arcane Lock 0)

Conjure Elemental
UBOVUOVONNENVOvON

Detect Magic

Dispel Magic

Enlarge/Reduce

Fireball (level 7 version)
Flaming Sphere

Ice Storm

Invisibility

Knock

Light
Lightning Bolt (level 7 version)

Mage Hand

Passwall

Plane Shift

Protection from Evil and Good

Telekinesis

Wall of Fire
NR

Web

BIO CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Regaining Charges. The staff regains 446 + 2 ex- Spell Charge Cost |
pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last Animal Friendship
charge, roll 1420, On a 20, the staff regains 1d12 + 1
Awaken
charges.
Retributive Strike. You can take a Magic action Barkskin
to break the staff over your knee or against a solid Locate Animals or Plants
surface. The staff is destroyed and releases its magic
Pass without Trace
in an explosion that fills a 30-foot Emanation ori
inating from itself. You have a 50 percent chance Speak with Animals
to instantly travel to a random plane of existence, Speak with Plants
avoiding the explosion. If you fail to avoid the effect,
Wall of Thorns
you take Force damage equal to 16 times the num-
ber of charges in the staff. Each other creature in Tree Form. You can take a Magic action to plant
the area makes a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. On one end ofthe staffin earth in an unoccupied space
a failed save, a creature takes Force damage equal to and expend I charge to transform the staff into
6 times the number of charges in the staff. On a suc- ahealthy tree. The tree is 60 feet tall and has a
cessful save, a creature takes half
asmuch damage. 5-foot-diameter trunk, and its branches at the top
spread out in a 20-foot radius. The tree appears
ordinary but radiates a faint aura of Transmutation
STAFF OF THE PYTHON
magic that can be discerned with the Detect Magic
Staff, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
spell. While touching the tree and using a Magic
‘As a Magic action, you can throw this staff so that it action, you return the staff to its normal form. Any
lands in an unoccupied space within 10 feet of you, creature in the tree falls when the tree reverts to
causing the staff
to become a Giant Constrictor a staff.
Snake in that space. The snake is under your con- Regaining Charges. The staff regains 146 expended
trol and shares your Initiative count, taking its turn charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge,
immediately after yours. roll 1420. On a1, the staff loses its properties and
On your turn, you can mentally command the becomes a nonmagical Quarterstaff.
snake (no action required) if itis within 60 feet of
you and you don't have the Incapacitated condition.
You decide what action the snake takes and where it STAFF OF THUNDER AND LIGHTNING
moves during its turn, or you can issue it a general Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
command, such as to attack your enemies or guard This staff can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff
a location, Absent commands from you, the snake that grants a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage
defends itself. rolls made with it, It also has the following addi-
‘As a Bonus Action, you can command the snake tional properties. Once one of these properties is
to revert to staff form in its current space, and you used, it can't be used again until the next dawn,
can't use the staff's property again for 1! hour. If Lightning. When you hit with a melee attack using
the snake is reduced to 0 Hit Points, it dies and re- the staff, you can cause the target to take an extra
verts to its staff form; the staff then shatters and is 2d6 Lightning damage (no action required).
destroyed. If the snake reverts to staff form before Thunder. When you hit with a melee attack using
losing all its Hit Points, it regains all of them. the staff, you can cause the staff to emit a crack
of thunder audible out to 300 feet (no action re-
quired). The target you hit must succeed on a DC
STAFF OF THE WOODLANDS
17 Constitution saving throw or have the Stunned
Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Druid) condition until the end of your next turn,
This staff has 6 charges and can be wielded as a Thunder and Lightning. Immediately after you hit
magic Quarterstaff that grants a +2 bonus to attack with a melee attack using the staff, you can take
rolls and damage rolls made with it. While holding a Bonus Action to use the Lightning and Thunder
it, you have a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls. properties (see above) at the same time. Doing so .
Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of doesn’t expend the daily use of those properties, .
the spells on the following table from it, using your only the use of this one.
spell save DC. The table indicates how many charges Lightning Strike. You can take a Magic ac-
you must expend to cast the spell. tion to cause a bolt oflightning to leap from the
staff's tip in a Line that is 5 feet wide and 120 feet
long. Each creature in that Line makes a DC 17

CHAPTER7| TREASURE IT

Srone oF

Gooo Luex.

Starr of Twunoea

Starr or
Wirwening

space you choose within 30 feet of yourself, obeys
your commands, and takes its turn immediately
after you on your Initiative count. The elemental
Dexterity saving throw, taking 946 Lightning dam- disappears after 1 hour, when it dies, or when you
age on a failed save or half as much damage on a dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The stone can't be used
successful one. this way again until the next dawn,
‘Thunderclap. You can take a Magic action to
cause the staff to produce a thunderclap audible out
to 600 feet. Every creature a 60-foot Em- Stone or Goop Luck (LucksTone)
anation originating from you makes a DC 17 Con- Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
stitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature ‘While this polished agate is on your person, you
takes 246 Thunder damage and has the Deafened gain a +1 bonus to ability checks and saving throws.
condition for1 minute. On a successful save, a crea-
ture takes half
as much damage only.
Sun BLapE
Weapon (Longsword), Rare (Requires Attunement)
STAFF OF WITHERING
This item appears to be a sword hilt.
Staff; Rare (Requires Attunement)
Blade of Radiance. While grasping the hilt, you
‘This staff has 3 charges and regains 143 expended can take a Bonus Action to cause a blade of pure
charges daily at dawn. radiance to spring into existence or make the
The staff can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff. blade disappear. While the blade exists, this magic
On ahit, it deals damage as a normal Quarterstaff, weapon functions as a Longsword with the Finesse
and you can expend 1 charge to deal an extra 2410 property. If you are proficient with Longswords or
Necrotic damage to the target and force it to make Shortswords, you are proficient with the Sun Blade.
a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a failed You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage
save, the target has Disadvantage for1 hour on any rolls made with this weapon, which deals Radiant
ability check or saving throw that uses Strength or damage instead of Slashing damage. When you hit
Constitution. an Undead with it, that target takes an extra 1d8
Radiant damage.
Sunlight. The sword’s luminous blade emits Bright
SToNE OF CONTROLLING EARTH Light in a 15-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi-
ELEMENTALS
tional 15 feet. The light is sunlight. While the blade
Wondrous Item, Rare
persists, you can take a Magic action to expand or
While touching this 5-pound stone to the ground, reduce its radius of Bright Light and Dim Light by 5
you can take a Magic action to summon an Earth feet each, to a maximum of 30 feet each or a mini-
Elemental. The elemental appears in an unoccupied mum of 10 feet each.

312 CHAPTER
7 | TREASURE

Sunorave

Random Properties. The sword has the following
Sworp OF ANSWERING random properties (see “Artifacts” in this chapter):
Weapon (Longsword), Legendary (Requires Attunement) + Iminor beneficial property
‘You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls + Lmajor beneficial property
made with this sword. In addition, while you hold + Iminor detrimental property
the sword, you can take a Reaction to make one me- + Imajor detrimental property
lee attack with it against any creature in your reach
Spells. While the sword is on your person, you can
that deals damage to you. You have Advantage on
cast the following spells (save DC 18) from it:
the attack roll, and any damage dealt with this spe-
cial attack ignores any Immunity or Resistance the + Call Lightning
target has to that damage. + Divine Word
+ Finger
of Death

‘Once you use the sword to cast a spell, you can't,
Sworp or Kas
cast that spell again from it until the next dawn.
Weapon (Longsword), Artifact (Requires Attunement)
Spirit of Kas. While the sword is on your person,
Kas was a powerful warrior who served Vecna you gain the following benefits:
and whose loyalty was rewarded with this sword.
Battle Hunger. You add 1d10 to your Initiative rolls.
‘As Kas's power grew, so did his hubris. The sword
Blade of Defense, When you take an action to at-
urged Kas to destroy Vecna and usurp his throne.
tack with the sword, you can transfer some or all
Legend says Vecna’s destruction came at Kas's hand,
of its attack bonus to your Armor Class instead.
but Vecna also wrought his rebellious lieutenant’s
The adjusted bonuses remain in effect until the
doom, leaving only Kas's sword behind.
start of your next turn.
Bloodthirst. The sword thirsts for blood. If the
Necrotic Resistance. You have Resistance to
sword doesn't taste blood on its blade within 1 min-
Necrotic damage.
ute of being drawn from its scabbard, its wielder
makes a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a suc- Sentience. The Sword of Kas is a sentient Chaotic
cessful save, the wielder takes 346 Psychic damage. Evil weapon with an Intelligence of15, a Wisdom of
On a failed save, the wielder is dominated by the 13, and a Charisma of 16. It has hearing and Darkvi-
sword, as if by the Dominate Monster spell, and the sion out to 120 feet.
sword demands blood. The spell effect ends when ‘The weapon communicates telepathically with its
the sword’s demand is met. wielder and speaks Common.
‘Magic Weapon. You gain a +3 bonus to attack Personality. The sword's purpose is to bring ruin
rolls and damage rolls made with the sword, which to Veena. Killing Vecna's worshipers, destroying the
scores a Critical Hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20 lich’s works, and foiling his machinations all help to
and deals an extra 2410 Slashing damage to Undead. fulfill this goal.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 313

‘The Sword of Kas also seeks to destroy anyone cor- You can break the curse in the usual ways. Alter-
rupted by the Eye and Hand of Vecna. natively, casting Banishment on the weapon forces
Destroying the Sword. A creature attuned to both the vengeful spirit to leave it. The weapon then be-
the Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Vecna can use the comes a +1 Weapon with no other properties.
Wish property of those combined Artifacts to un-
make the Sword of Kas, provided the sword is within
30 feet of the spell’s caster. Upon casting Wish, the Sworp oF WouNDING
creature makes a DC 18 Charisma saving throw. On Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier,
a failed save, nothing happens, and the Wish spell Scimitar, or Shortsword), Rare (Requires Attunement)
is wasted. On a successful save, the Sword of Kas is ‘When you hit a creature with an attack using
destroyed. this magic weapon, the target takes an extra 246
Necrotic damage and must succeed on a DC 15
Constitution saving throw or be unable to regain
Sworp oF Lire STEALING
Hit Points forI hour. The target repeats the save
Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier,
at the end of each ofits turns, ending the effect on
Scimitar, or Shortsword), Rare (Requires Attunement) itself on a success.
When you attack a creature with this magic weapon
and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, that
target takes an extra 15 Necrotic damage if it isn't a SYLVAN TALON
Construct or an Undead, and you gain Temporary Weapon (Dagger, Rapier, Scimitar, Shortsword, Sickle,
Hit Points equal to the amount of Necrotic damage or Spear), Common (Requires Attunement)
taken. While this weapon is on your person, you under-
stand the nonwritten communication of all Fey, and
they understand yours.
Sworp oF SHARPNESS
Secret Message. As a Magic action, you can use
Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, or Scimitar),
the weapon to cast Message. Once this property is
Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
used, it can't be used again until the next dawn,
When you attack an object with this magic weapon
and hit, maximize your weapon damage dice against
the target. TALISMAN OF Purs Goop
When you attack a creature with this weapon Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement by
a
and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, that Cleric or Paladin)
target takes an extra 14 Slashing damage and gains This talisman is a mighty symbol of goodness. A
1 Exhaustion level. Fiend or an Undead that touches the talisman takes
8d6 Radiant damage and takes the damage again
each time it ends its turn holding or carrying the
Sworp OF VENGEANCE
talisman.
Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Holy Symbol. You can use the talisman as a Holy
Scimitar, or Shortsword), Uncommon (Requires
Symbol. You gain a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls
Attunement)
while you wear or hold it.
You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls Pure Rebuke. The talisman has 7 charges. While
made with this magic weapon. wearing or holding the talisman, you can take a
Curse. This weapon is cursed and possessed by a Magic action to expend I charge and target one
vengeful spirit. Becoming attuned to it extends the creature you can see on the ground within 120 feet
curse to you. As long as you remain cursed, you of yourself. A flaming fissure opens under the tar-
are unwilling to part with the weapon, keeping it get, and the target makes a DC 20 Dexterity saving
on your person at all times. While attuned to this throw. If the target is a Fiend or an Undead, it has
‘weapon, you have Disadvantage on attack rolls Disadvantage on the save. On a failed save, the tar-
made with weapons other than this one. get falls into the fissure and is destroyed, leaving no
In addition, while the weapon is on your person, remains. On a successful save, the target isn't cast
you must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw into the fissure but takes 4d6 Psychic damage from
whenever you take damage from another creature the ordeal. In either case, the fissure then closes,
in combat. On a failed save, you must attack the leaving no trace of its existence. When you expend
creature that damaged you until you drop to 0 Hit the last charge, the talisman disperses into motes of
Points or it does or until you can't reach the crea golden light and is destroyed.
ture to make a melee attack against it.

314 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

‘Swono oF Lire
Sreating (Loneswono)

Swono oF

(Gnearswono) a

(Seaman)

Tatisman oF

Tauiswan oF
rue Severe

TALISMAN OF THE SPHERE
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement)

While holding or wearing this talisman, you have
Advantage on any Intelligence (Arcana) check you
make to control a Sphere of Annihilation. In addition,
when you start your turn in control of a Sphere of
Annihilation, you can take a Magic action to move ordeal. In either case, the fissure then closes, leaving

it 10 feet plus a number of additional feet equal to no trace of its existence. When you expend the last
10 times your Intelligence modifier. This movement charge, the talisman dissolves into foul-smelling.
doesn't have to be in a straight line. slime and is destroyed.

‘TALISMAN OF ULTIMATE EVIL TALKING Dott.
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement)

This item symbolizes unrepentant evil. A creature While this doll is within 5 feet ofyou, you can
that isn’t a Fiend or an Undead that touches the spend a Short Rest telling it to say up to six phrases,
talisman takes 846 Necrotic damage and takes the none of which can be more than six words long, and
damage again each time it ends its turn holding or set a condition under which the doll speaks each
carrying the talisman. phrase. You can also replace old phrases with new

Holy Symbol, You can use the talisman as a Holy ones. Whatever the condition, it must occur
Symbol. You gain a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls 5 feet of the doll to make it speak. For example,
while you wear or hold it. whenever someone picks up the doll, it might say,
Ultimate End. The talisman has 6 charges. While “Lwant a piece of candy.” The doll’s phrases are lost
wearing or holding the talisman, you can take a when your Attunement to the doll ends.
Magic action to expend I charge and target one
creature you can see on the ground within 120
feet of yourself. A flaming fissure opens under the
TANKARD OF SOBRIETY
Wondrous Item, Common
target, and the target makes a DC 20 Dexterity
saving throw. If the target is a Celestial, it has Dis- This tankard has a stern face sculpted into one side.
advantage on the save. On a failed save, the target You can drink ale, wine, or any other nonmagical
falls into the fissure and is destroyed, leaving no re- alcoholic beverage poured into it without becoming
mains, On a successful save, the target isn't cast into inebriated. The tankard has no effect on magical lig-
the fissure but takes 446 Psychic damage from the uids or harmful substances such as poison,

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 315

‘The weapon has the following additional
TENTACLE Rop properties.
Rod, Rare (Requires Attunement) Clap of Thunder. As a Magic action, you can
strike the weapon against a hard surface to create
This rod ends in three rubbery tentacles. While
a loud clap of thunder audible out to 300 feet. You
holding the rod, you can take a Magic action to
also create a 30-foot Cone of thunderous energy.
ct the tentacles to stretch outward, each one
Each creature in the Cone must succeed on a DC 15
attacking a creature you can see within 15 feet of
Strength saving throw or have the Prone condition.
yourself. For each tentacle, make a melee attack
Nonmagical objects in the Cone that aren't being
roll with a +9 bonus. A tentacle deals 1d6 Psychic
worn or carried take 348 Thunder damage.
damage on a hit. If you hit the same target with all
Earthquake. As a Magic action, you can strike the
three tentacles, the target must succeed on a DC 15,
‘weapon against the ground to create an intense seis-
Dexterity saving throw or have the Restrained con-
mic disturbance in a 50-foot-radius circle centered
dition until you have the Incapacitated condition,
on the point of impact. Structures in contact with
until you take a Bonus Action to release the target,
the ground in that area take 50 Bludgeoning dam-
or until the target is no longer within 15 feet ofyou.
age, and each creature on the ground in that area
While Restrained in this way, the target takes 346
must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw
Psychic damage at the start ofeach of its turns. At
or have the Prone condition. If that creature is also
the end ofeach of its turns, the target repeats the
concentrating, it must succeed on a DC 20 Consti-
save, ending the effect on itself on a success.
tution saving throw or its Concentration is broken,
In addition, you can cause a 30-foot-deep, 10-foot-

‘THUNDEROUS GREATCLUB wide fissure to open up on the ground anywhere in

Weapon (Greatclub), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) the area. Any creature on a spot where the fissure
‘opens must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving
While you are attuned to this magic weapon, your
throw, falling into the fissure on a failed save or
Strength is 20 unless your Strength is already equal
moving with the fissure’s edge on a successful one.
to or greater than that score. The weapon deals an
Any structure on a spot where the fissure opens
extra 1d8 Thunder damage to any creature it hits
collapses into the fissure. Once you use this prop-
and an extra 348 Thunder damage to objects it hits
erty, it can't be used again until the next dawn.
that aren't being worn or carried.

Taveine Dow.

Tuunosnous

Gaearceve

316 CHAPTER7 | TREASURE

While attuned to this item, you can use it as a
ToME oF CLEAR THOUGHT Spellbook and an Arcane Focus. In addition, while
Wondrous Item, Very Rare holding the tome, you can take a Bonus Action to
cast a spell you have written in this tome, without
This book contains memory and logic exercises, and
expending a spell slot or using any Verbal or So-
its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48
matic components. Once used, this property of the
hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the
tome can't be used again until the next dawn.
book’s contents and practicing its guidelines, your
Only you can remove the tongue from the book’s
Intelligence increases by 2, to a maximum of 30.
cover. IF you do so, all spells written in the book are
‘The manual then loses its magic but regains it in
permanently erased.
a century.
‘Vecna watches anyone using this tome and can
write cryptic messages in it. These messages typi-
cally fade away after they are read.
ToME OF LEADERSHIP AND INFLUENCE
Wondrous Item, Very Rare

This book contains guidelines for influencing and ‘TOME OF UNDERSTANDING
charming others, and its words are charged with Wondrous Item, Very Rare
magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days
‘This book contains intuition and insight exercises,
or fewer studying the book's contents and practic-
and its words are charged with magic. If you spend
ing its guidelines, your Charisma increases by 2, to
48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying
a maximum of 30. The manual then loses its magic
the book's contents and practicing its guidelines,
but regains it in a century.
your Wisdom increases by 2, to a maximum of 30.
‘The manual then loses its magic, but regains it in
acentury.
ToME OF THE STILLED TONGUE
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement by a
Wizard)
‘TripENT OF Fish ComMAND
This book has a desiccated tongue pinned to its Weapon (Trident), Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
front cover. Five of these tomes exist, and it's un-
‘This magic weapon has 3 charges, and it regains 143
known which one is the original. The tongue on the
expended charges daily at dawn. While you carry it,
first Tome of the Stilled Tongue belonged to a treach-
you can expend I charge to cast Dominate Beast (save
erous former servant ofthe lich Vecna. The tongues
DC 15) from it on a Beast that has a Swim Speed.
pinned to the covers of the four copies came from
other spellcasters who crossed Vecna. The first few
pages of each tome are filled with indecipherable
scrawls. The remaining pages are blank.

Tome or

Unoersranoine
Tome of Curan
Tuovenr

Tome oF Leaoensmie
ano Inetuence

é CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE
317

Univensan
Taioenr oF Souvent
Fie Commano

Vorpat Swono
conesworo)

When you use this weapon to attack a creature
UNIVERSAL SOLVENT that has at least one head and roll a 20 on the d20

Wondrous Item, Legendary for the attack roll, you cut off one of the creature's
heads. The creature dies if it can't survive without
This tube holds milky liquid with a strong alcohol
the lost head. A creature is immune to this effect
smell. When found, a tube contains 146 + 1 ounces.
if it has Immunity to Slashing damage, if it doesn’t
You can take a Utilize action to pour I or more
have or need a head, or if the DM decides that the
ounces of solvent from the tube onto a surface
creature is too big for its head to be cut off with this
within reach. Each ounce instantly dissolves up to 1
‘weapon, Such a creature instead takes an extra 30
square foot of adhesive it touches, including Sover-
Slashing damage from the hit. If the creature has,
eign Glue.
Legendary Resistance, it can expend one daily use
of that trait to avoid losing its head, taking the extra
damage instead.
VETERAN'S CANE
Wondrous Item, Common

Asa Bonus Action, you can transform this walking WALLOPING AMMUNITION
cane into an ordinary Longsword or change the Weapon (Any Ammunition), Common
Longsword back into a walking cane. In either case,
‘A creature hit by this ammunition must succeed on
you must be holding the item.
a DC 10 Strength saving throw or have the Prone
condition.

Victous WEAPON
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rare
WAND OF BINDING
This magic weapon deals an extra 246 damage to Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement)
any creature it hits. This extra damage is of the
This wand has 7 charges.
same type as the weapon’s normal damage.
Spells. While holding the wand, you can cast one
of the spells (save DC 17) on the following table
from it. The table indicates how many charges you
Vorpat SworD
must expend to cast the spell.
Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, or Scimitar),
Legendary (Requires Attunement) Spell Charge Cost
You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage Hold Monster 5
rolls made with this magic weapon. In addition, the Hold Person 2
weapon ignores Resistance to Slashing damage.

3x8 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Wano oF Enemy
Derecrion

Wan or Fear

Wano oF

Regaining Charges. The wand regains 16 +1
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend WAND oF FEAR
the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement)
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. This wand has 7 charges.
Spells. While holding the wand, you can cast one
of the spells (save DC 15) on the following table
WAND oF ConpucTING
from it. The table indicates how many charges you
Wand, Common
must expend to cast the spell.
This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can Charge Cost
take a Magic action to expend 1 charge and create
Spell
orchestral music by waving it around. The music Command (“flee” or “grovel” only) 1
can be heard out to 120 feet and ends when you Fear (60-foot Cone) 3
stop waving the wand.
Regaining Charges. The wand regains all expended Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 +1
charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand’s last expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
charge, roll 1420. On a I, a sad tuba sound plays as the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a1, the wand
the wand crumbles into dust and is destroyed. crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.

Wanp oF ENEMY DETECTION WAND OF FIREBALLS
Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement) Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster)
‘This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can ‘This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can
take a Magic action to expend 1 charge. For I min- expend no more than 3 charges to cast Fireball (save
ute, you know the direction of the nearest creature DC 15) from it. For 1 charge, you cast the level 3 ver-
Hostile to you within 60 feet, but not its distance sion of the spell. You can increase the spell's level by
from you. The wand can sense the presence of Hos- 1 for each additional charge you expend.
tile creatures that are Invisible, ethereal, disguised, Regaining Charges. The wand regains 146 + 1
or hidden, as well as those in plain sight. The effect expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
ends if you stop holding the wand. the wand’s last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand
Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
the wand’s last charge, roll 1420. On a1, the wand
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 319

Wano or

Ligurwine Bours Wanp oF LicHTNING Botts
Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster)

This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can
expend no more than 3 charges to cast Lightning Bolt
(save DC 15) from it. For I charge, you cast the level
3 version of the spell. You can increase the spell’s
level by 1 for each additional charge you expend.
Regaining Charges. The wand regains 146 + 1
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.
Wano oF Macie!
Derecrion

WAND oF Macic DETECTION
Wand, Uncommon

This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can
expend I charge to cast Detect Magic from it. The
wand regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn.

Wano oF Macic
WAND OF Macic MIssrLes
Missives
Wand, Uncommon

‘This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can,
expend no more than 3 charges to cast Magic Missile
from it. For1 charge, you cast the level 1 version of
the spell. You can increase the spell’s level by 1 for
each additional charge you expend.
Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 +1
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a I, the wand
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.

WAND oF Orcus
Wand, Artifact (Requires Attunement)

Crafted and wielded by Orcus, this ghastly wand
slips from the demon lord's grasp from time to time.
When it does, it magically appears wherever the
demon lord senses an opportunity to achieve some
fell goal,
The wand is topped with a skull that once be-
longed to a human hero slain by Orcus. The wand
can magically change in size to better conform to
the grip ofits user. All Holy Water within 10 feet of
the wand is destroyed.
Any creature besides Orcus that tries to attune to
the wand makes a DC 17 Constitution saving throw.
On a successful save, the creature takes 10d6 Ne-
Powwmonen
crotic damage. On a failed save, the creature
and, ifit is a Humanoid, turns into a Zombie.
Magic Weapon. You can wield the wand as a magic
Mace that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls and
damage rolls made with it. The wand deals an extra
2d12 Necrotic damage on a hit.

320 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Random Properties. The Wand of Orcus has the Destroying the Wand. Destroying the Wand of Or-
following random properties (see “Artifacts” in this, cus requires that it be taken to the Positive Energy
chapter): Plane by the ancient hero whose skull surmounts
it. For this to happen, the long-lost hero must first,
+ 2 minor beneficial properties
be restored to life—no easy task, given the fact that
+ Lmajor beneficial property
Orcus has imprisoned the hero's soul and keeps it
+ 2 minor detrimental properties
hidden and well guarded.
+ 1 major detrimental property
Bathing the wand in positive energy (such as that
The detrimental properties of the Wand of Orcus are which permeates the Positive Plane) causes it to
suppressed while the wand is attuned to Orcus. crack and explode, but unless the above conditions
Protection. You gain a +3 bonus to Armor Class are met, the wand instantly re-forms on Orcus's
while holding the wand. layer ofthe Abyss.
Spells. The wand has 7 charges and regains 1d4 +3
expended charges daily at dawn. While holding
the wand, you can cast one of the spells on the WAND OF PARALYSIS.
following table from it (save DC 18). The table indi- Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster)
cates how many charges you must expend to cast ‘This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can
the spell. take a Magic action to expend 1 charge to cause a
Spell Charge Cost thin blue ray to streak from the tip toward a crea-
ture you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The
Animate Dead 1
target must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving
Blight 2 throw or have the Paralyzed condition for 1 minute.
Gircle of Death 3 At the end of each of the target's turns, it repeats
the save, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
Finger of Death 3
Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1
Power Word Kill 4 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
Speak with Dead i the wand’s last charge, roll 1420. On a1, the wand
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.
While attuned to the wand, Orcus or a follower
blessed by him can cast each of the wand's spells
using 2 fewer charges (minimum of 0). WAND OF POLYMORPH
Call Undead. While holding the wand, you can Wand, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster)
take a Magic action to conjure 15 Skeletons and
This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can
15 Zombies. These Undead magically rise up from
expend I charge to cast Polymorph (save DC 15)
the ground or otherwise form in unoccupied spaces
from it.
within 300 feet of you and obey your commands
Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1
until they are destroyed or until the next dawn,
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
when they collapse into inanimate piles of bones
the wand’s last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand
and rotting corpses. Once you use this property,
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.
you can't use it again until the next dawn,
While holding the wand, Orcus can summon any
kind of Undead, not just skeletons and zombies. WAND OF PYROTECHNICS
These Undead don’t perish at dawn the following Wand, Common
day, remaining until Orcus dismisses them.
Sentience. The Wand of Orcus is a sentient Chaotic ‘This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can

Evil item with an Intelligence of 16, a Wisdom of 12, take a Magic action to expend I charge and create a
and a Charisma of 16. It has hearing and Darkvision harmless burst of multicolored light at a point you
out to 120 feet. can see up to 120 feet away. The burst of light is
‘The wand communicates telepathically with its accompanied by a crackling noise that can be heard
wielder and speaks Abyssal and Common. up to 300 feet away. The light is as bright as a torch
Personality. The wand's purpose is to help satisfy flame but lasts only a second.
Orcus's desire to slay everything in the multiverse. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1
The wand is cruel, nihilistic, and bereft of humor. expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
To further Orcus’s goals, the wand feigns devotion the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand
to its current user and makes grandiose promises erupts in a harmless pyrotechnic display and is,
destroyed.
that it has no intention of fulfilling, such as vowing
to help its user overthrow Orcus.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 32

Wand of Wonder Effects table. Spells cast from the
WAND oF SECRETS wand have a save DC of 15. Ifa spell’s maximum
Wand, Uncommon range is normally less than 120 feet, it becomes 120

This wand has 3 charges and regains 143 expended feet when cast from the wand. If an effect has multi-
ple possible subjects, the DM determines randomly
charges daily at dawn. While holding it, you can
take a Magic action to expend
1 charge, and ifa se- which among them are affected.

cret door or trap is within 60 feet of you, the wand Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend
pulses and points at the one nearest to you.
the wand’s last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand
crumbles into dust and is destroyed.
WAND OF THE War Mace, +1, +2, or +3
Wanp oF Wonper EFFects
Wand, Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3)
(Requires Attunement by a Spelicaster) 1100 Effect

While holding this wand, you gain a bonus to spell 01-20 You cast a spell originating from the chosen
attack rolls determined by the wand'’s rarity. In ad- point, Roll 1410 to determine the spell: on
dition, you ignore Half Cover when making a spell 21-2, Darkness; on a 34, Faerie Fire; on
attack roll. 25-6, Fireball; on a 7-8, Slow; on a 9-10,
Stinking Cloud.

WAND oF Wes 21-25. Nothing happens at the chosen point of
Wand, Uncommon (Requires Attunement by a origin. Instead, you have the Stunned condi-
Spellcaster) tion until the start of your next turn, believ-
ing something awesome just happened.
‘This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can
expend 1 charge to cast Web (save DC 13) from it. 26-30 You cast Gust of Wind. The Line created by
Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 the spell extends from you to the chosen
expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend point oforigin.
the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand
31-35. Nothing happens at the chosen point of ori-
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.
gin. Instead, you take 146 Psychic damage.

36-40 Heavy rain falls for 1
WAND OF WONDER high, 60-foot-radius
Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement) the chosen point of origin. During that time,
This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you the area of effect is Lightly Obscured.
can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge while 41-45 A cloud of 600 oversized butterflies fills a
choosing a point within 120 feet of yourself. That
60-foot-high, 30-foot-radius Cylinder cen-
location becomes the point of origin of a spell or
tered on the chosen point of origin. The but-
other magical effect determined by rolling on the
terflies remain for 10 minutes, during which
time the area of effect is Heavily Obscured.

Hiker ce ——
Wano oF Secners

——~_ Finger meg Wan oF rHe Wan Mace

Wano oF Wes

Wano or Wonven

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

14100 Effect 1d100 Effect
46-50 You cast Lightning Bolt. The Line created by 83-87 Nothing happens at the chosen point ofori-
the spell extends from you to the chosen gin, Instead, you cast Invisibility on yourself.
point oforigin. 88-92 Nothing happens at the chosen point of
51-55 The creature closest to the chosen point of origin. Instead, a stream of 1d4 x 10 gems,
origin is enlarged as if you had cast Enlarge/ each worth 1 GP, shoots from the wand's tip
Reduce on it. f the target isn’t you and can’t ina Line 30 feet long and 5 feet wide toward
be affected by that spell, you become the the chosen point of origin. Each gem deals
target instead. 1 Bludgeoning damage, and the total dam-
56-60 ‘A magically formed creature appears in an age ofthe gems is divided equally among all
unoccupied space as close to the chosen creatures in the Line.
point of origin as possible. The creature 93-97 You cast Polymorph, targeting the creature
isn’t under your control, acts as it normally closest to the chosen point of origin. Roll
would, and disappears after 1 hour or 1d4 to determine the target's new form. On
when it drops to 0 Hit Points. Roll 1d4 to a1, the new form is a Black Bear; on a 2,
determine which creature appears. On a 1, the new form is a Giant Wasp; on a 3-4, the
2 Rhinoceros appears; on a 2, an Elephant new form is a Frog.
appears; and on a 3=4, a Rat appears. 98-00 The creature closest to the chosen point of
61-64 Grass covers a 60-foot-radius circle of origin makes a DC 15 Constitution saving
ground, with the center of that circle as throw. On a failed save, the creature has
close to the chosen point oforigin as pos- the Restrained condition and begins to turn
sible. Grass that's already there grows to to stone. While Restrained in this way, the
ten times its normal size and remains over- creature repeats the save at the end of its
grown for 1 minute. next turn. On a successful save, the effect

65-68 ‘An object of the DM's choice disappears ends. On a failed save, the creature has the
into the Ethereal Plane. The object must be Petrified condition instead of the Restrained
neither worn nor carried, within 120 feet of condition. The petrification lasts until the

the chosen point oforigin, and no larger creature is freed by the Greater Restoration

than 10 feet in any dimension. Ifthere are spell or similar magic.

no such objects in range, nothing happens.
69-72 Nothing happens at the chosen point of
WAVE
origin. Instead, you shrink as if you had cast
Weapon (Trident), Artifact (Requires Attunement)
Enlarge/Reduce on yourself and remain in
Held in the dungeon of White Plume Mountain,
that state for 1 minute.
Wave is engraved with images of waves, shells, and
73-77 Leaves grow from the creature nearest to sea creatures.
the chosen point of origin. Unless they are You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage
picked off, the leaves turn brown and fall off rolls made with this magic weapon. When you roll
after 24 hours. 220 on the d20 for an attack roll with this weapon,
the target takes an extra 21 Necrotic damage.
78-82 Nothing happens at the chosen point of ori-
While holding Wave, you gain the following
gin. Instead, a burst of colorful, shimmering
benefits:
light extends from you in a 30-foot Emana-
tion, Each creature in the area must succeed Combat Ready. You have Advantage on Initiative

ona DC 15 Constitution saving throw or rolls.

have the Blinded condition for 1 minute. A Underwater Adaptation. A bubble ofair forms
around your head while you are underwa-
creature repeats the save at the end of each
ter, allowing you to breathe normally in that
ofits turns, ending the effect on itself on a
environment.
success.

CHAPTER7| TREASURE 323,

Aquatic Command. Wave has 3 charges and re-
You can take a Magic action to unfold the Well of
gains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn, While
Many Worlds and place it on a solid surface, where-
you carry it, you can expend I charge to cast Domi-
upon it forms a two-way, 6-foot-diameter, circular
nate Beast (save DC 20) from it on a Beast that has a
portal to another world or plane of existence. Each
‘Swim Speed. time the item opens a portal, the DM decides where
Globe of Invulnerability. While holding Wave, you
it leads. The portal remains open until a creature
can cast the level 9 version of Globe of Invulnerability
within 5 feet of it takes a Magic action to close it
from it. Once used, this property can't be used again
by taking hold of the edges of the cloth and folding
until the next dawn,
itup.
Sentience. Wave is a sentient weapon of Neutral
Once the Well of Many Worlds has opened a portal,
alignment, with an Intelligence of 14, a Wisdom of
it can't do so again for 148 hours.
10, and a Charisma of 18. It has hearing and Darkvi-
sion out to 120 feet.
The weapon communicates telepathically with its WHELM
wielder and speaks Aquan,
Weapon (Warhammer), Artifact (Requires Attunement
Personality. Wave zealously encourages mortals
by a Dwaror
f a Creature Attuned to a Belt of
to worship sea gods and has a habit of humming sea
Dwarvenkind)
chanteys. Conflict arises if the wielder fails to fur-
Whelm is a powerful weapon forged by dwarves and
ther the weapon's objectives in the world,
lost in the dungeon of White Plume Mountain,
Destroying Wave. Wave can be destroyed only on
You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage
the island of Thunderforge, where it was forged.
rolls made with this magic weapon,
‘The weapon must be melted down by a storm giant
Hurl. Whelm has the Thrown property with a
‘or someone imbued with a storm giant's strength.
normal range of 60 feet and a long range of 180
Destroying Wave angers a god of the sea, who sends
feet. When you hit with a ranged attack roll using
powerful agents to attack the island and punish the
Whelm, the target takes an extra 1d8 Force damage,
destroyers.
or an extra 4d8 Force damage if the target is a Con-
struct, an Elemental, or a Giant, Immediately after

Weapon, +1, +2, oR +3 hitting or missing, the weapon flies back to your

Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Uncommon (+1), Rare hand,
(2), or Very Rare (+3) Shock Wave. You can take a Magic action to strike
the ground with Whelm and send a shock wave out
You have a bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
from the point of impact. Each creature of your
made with this magic weapon. The bonus is deter-
choice on the ground within 60 feet of that point
mined by the weapon's rarity.
must succeed on a DC 20 Constitution saving throw
or have the Stunned condition for 1 minute. A crea-
ture repeats the save at the end of each of its turns,
‘WEAPON OF WARNING
ending the effect on itself
on a success. Once used,
Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Uncommon (Requires
this property can't be used again until the next
Attunement)
dawn.
As long as this weapon is within your reach and you Supernatural Awareness. While you are holding
are attuned to it, you and allies within 30 feet of the weapon, it alerts you to the location ofany se-
you gain the following benefits, cret or concealed doors within 30 feet ofyou. In
Alarm. The weapon magically awakens each sub- addition, you can cast Detect Evil and Good or Locate
ject who is sleeping naturally when combat begins. Object from the weapon. Once you cast either spell,
This benefit doesn’t wake a subject from magically you can't cast it from the weapon again until the
induced sleep. next dawn,
‘Supernatural Readiness. Each subject has Advan- Sentience. Wheim is a sentient, Lawful Neutral
tage on its Initiative rolls. ‘weapon with an Intelligence of 15, a Wisdom of 12,
and a Charisma of 15. It has hearing and Darkvision
out to 120 feet.
WELL or Many Wortps
The weapon communicates telepathically with its
Wondrous Item, Legendary
wielder and speaks Dwarvish, Giant, and Gobli
This fine black cloth, soft as silk, is folded up to the Personality. Whelm has ties to the dwarf clan that
dimensions of a handkerchief. It unfolds into a cir- created it, called the Dankil or the Mightyhammer
cular sheet 6 feet in diameter. clan, It longs to be returned to that clan. Whelm's
purpose is to protect dwarves. Conflict arises if the
wielder doesn't share this goal.

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

Weavon oF Wannine

(Tavoenr)

Wings oF Fuvine

+1 Weavon

(OWaR Piew)

Winseo Boors

Destroying Whelm. Whelm can be dissolved in the
acidic bile of a recently slain ancient black dragon. WINGs OF FLYING
It can also be melted down in the forges of the Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement)
Mightyhammer dwarf clan, but only by the rightful
While wearing this cloak, you can take a Magic ac-
leader of that clan. tion to turn the cloak into a pair of wings on your
back. The wings lasts for1 hour or until you end the
effect early as a Magic action. The wings give youa
Win FAN
Fly Speed of 60 feet. If you are aloft when the wings
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
disappear, you fall. When the wings disappear, you
While holding this fan, you can cast Gust
of Wind can't use them again for 1d12 hours.
(save DC 13) from it. Each subsequent time the fan
is used before the next dawn, it has a cumulative
20 percent chance of not working; if the fan fails to Wraps OF UNARMED POWER
work, it tears into useless, nonmagical tatters. Wondrous Item, Uncommon (+l), Rare (+2), or Very Rare
(3)

While wearing these wraps, you have a bonus
Wincep Boors
to attack rolls and damage rolls made with your
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement)
Unarmed Strikes. The bonus is determined by the
‘These boots have 4 charges and regain 1d4 ex- wraps’ rarity, and those strikes deal your choice of
pended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the Force damage or their normal damage type.
boots, you can take a Magic action to expend 1
charge, gaining a Fly Speed of 30 feet for1 hour. If
you are flying when the duration expires, you de-
scend at a rate of 30 feet per round until you land.

CHAPTER 7|TREASURE 325

RANDOM 14100 Item 14100 Item

Macic ITems 65-66 Rope of Mending 33 Hat of Disguise

Use the tables in this section to 67-68 Ruby of the War Mage 34 Headband of Intellect
randomly determine magic items 69-82 Spell Scroll (cantrip or 35 Helm of Comprehending
the characters find in your adven- level 1 spell) Languages
tures. The tables are sorted first
83-84 Staff of Adornment 36 Helm of Telepathy
by treasure theme (as described
in the Monster Manual), and then 85-86 Stofaf
Birdeall
fs 37 Immovable Rod
by item rarity. If an item isn't as- 87-89 Staff
of Flowers 38 Lantern of Revealing
sociated with a theme, roll 1d4 to
90-92 Talking Doll 39 Medallion of Thoughts
decide which table to roll on next:
onal, roll on the Arcana tables; 93-94 Tankard of Sobriety 40 Mithral Armor
ona 2, Armaments; on a 3, Imple- 95-97 Wand of Conducting 41-42 Necklace of Adaptation
ments; and on a 4, Relics.
98-00 Wand of Pyrotechnics 43 Oil of Slipperiness
ARCANA TABLES 44 Pearl of Power
ARCANA—UNCOMMON
ARCANA—COMMON 45 Periapt of Health
14100 Item
14100 Item 46-47 Philter of Love
01 Amulet of Proof against
01-02 Bead of Nourishment 48-49 Potion of Animal
Detection and Location
Friendship
03-04 Bead of Refreshment 02 Baba Yaga’s Dancing
50-51 Potion of Fire Breath
05-07 Candle of the Deep Broom

03-05 Bag of Holding
52-53 Potion of Giant Strength
08-10 Cloak of Billowing
(rill)
n-3 Cloak of Many Fashions 06-07 Bag of Tricks
54-55 Potion of Growth
14-15 Clothes of Mending 08 Brooch of Shielding
56-57 Potion of Poison
1617 Dark Shard Amulet 09 Broom of Flying
58-59 Potion of Resistance
18-19 Enduring Spellbook 10 Cap of Water Breathing
60-61 Potion of Water Breathing
20-21 Ersatz Eye V1 Circlet of Blasting
62 Quaal’s Feather Token
22-24 Hat of Vermin 1213 Cloak of Protection
(anchor, fan, or tree)
25-27 Hat of Wizardry 14 Cloak of the Manta Ray
63 Ring of Mind Shielding
28-29 Heward's Handy Spice 1S Decanter of Endless Water
64-65 Robe of Useful Items
Pouch 16 Deck of illusions
66-67 Rod of the Pact Keeper, +1
30-31 Horn ofSilent Alarm W-18 Drifiglobe
68-69 Rope of Climbing
32-33 Instrument ofillusions 19-20 Dust of Disappearance
70 Saddle of the Cavalier
34-35 Instrument of Scribing 21 Dust of Dryness
n-22 Sending Stones
36-37 Lock of Trickery 22 Dust of Sneezing and
73-74 Slippers of Spider Climbing
38-40 Mystery Key Choking
75-82 Spell Scroll (level 2 oF 3
4-42 Orb of Direction 23-24 Elemental Gem
spell)
43-44 Orb of Time 25 Enspelled Staff (cantrip or
83 Staff
of the Adder
level 1 spell)
45-46 Perfume of Bewitching
84 Staff
of the Python
47-49 26 Eversmoking Bottle
Pipe of Smoke Monsters
85-88 Wand of Magic Detection
27 Eyes of Charming
50-52 Potion of Climbing
89-91 Wand of Magic Missiles
28 Eyes of Minute Seeing
53-55 Potion of Comprehension
92-93 Wand of Secrets
29-30 Figurine of Wondrous
56-58 Pot of Awakening
94-95 Wand of the War Mage, +1
Power (silver raven)
59-60 Prosthetic Limb
96-97 Wand of Web
31 Gem of Brightness
61-64 Rival Coin
32 Hog Eye 98-99 Wind Fan
00 Winged Boots

326 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

ARCANA—RARE 1100 Item 1d100 Item
14100 Item
48-49 Potion of Giant Strength 15-16 Enspelled Staff (level 4 or
o Bag of Beans (frost or stone) 5 spell),
02-03 Bead of Force 50-51 Potion of Heroism W-18 Figurine of Wondrous
04 Bowl of Commanding 52-53 Potion of Invisibility Power (obsidian steed)
Water Elementals 54-55 Potion of Invulnerability 19-20 Hat of Many Spells
05-06 Bracers of Defense 2-22 Helm of Brilliance
56-57 Potion of Mind Reading
07 Brazier of Commanding 58-59 Quaal’s Feather Token 23-24 Horseshoes ofa Zephyr
Fire Elementals
(bird, swan boat, or whip) 25-26 loun Stone (absorption,
08-09 Cape of the Mountebank fortitude, intellect, or
60-61 Ring of Feather Falling
10 Censer of Controlling Air leadership)
62 Ring of Spell Storing
Elementals 27-28 Manual of Golems (clay,
63 Ring ofX-ray Vision
n-2 Chime of Opening flesh, iron, or stone)
64-65 Robe of Eyes
B14 Cloak of Displacement 29 Mirror of Life Trapping
66 Rod of Rulership
15-16 Cloak of the Bat 30-31 Nolzur's Marvelous
67-68 Rod of the Pact Keeper, +2 Pigments
V7 Cube of Force
69-70 Scroll of Protection 32-34 Oil of Sharpness
8 Cube of Summoning
n-7s Spell Scroll (level 4 or S
35-38 Potion of Flying
19 Daern's Instant Fortress
spell)
39-42 Potion of Giant Strength
20-21 Enspelled Staff (level 2 or
76-77 Staff
of Charming
(cloud)
3 spell)
78-79 Staff
of Swarming Insects 43-46 Potion of Greater
22-23 Figurine of Wondrous
80-81 Staff
of Withering Invisibility
Power (bronze griffon, eb-
ony fly, golden lions, ivory 82 Stone of Controlling Earth 47-49 Potion of Longevity
goats, marble elephant, Elementals
50-53 Potion of Speed
‘onyx dog, or serpentine 83-84 Wand of Binding 34-57 Potion of Vitality
ow!) 85-86 Wand of Fear
58-59 Ring of Regeneration
24-25 Folding Boat 87-90 Wand of Fireballs 60-61 Ring of Shooting Stars
26-27 Gem of Seeing 91-94 Wand of Lightning Bolts
62-63, Ring of Telekinesis
28 Helm of Teleportation 95-96 Wand of the War Mage, +2 64-65 Robe of Scintillating Colors
29-30 Heward’s Handy 97-98 Wand of Wonder
66-67 Robe of Stars
Haversack
99-00 Wings of Flying
68-69 Rod of Absorption
31-32 Horseshoes of Speed
70-1) Rod of Security
33-34 oun Stone (reserve) ARCANA—VERY RARE
72-73 Rod of the Pact Keeper, +3
35 Iron Bands of Bilarro 14100 Item

Amulet of the Planes
74-85 Spell Scroll (level 6, 7, or
36 Mantle of Spell Resistance 01-02
8 spell)
37-38 Necklace of Fireballs 03-04 Bag of Devouring
36-87 Sta Fire
offf
39, Oil of Etherealness 05-06 Carpet of Flying
88-89 Staff
of Frost
40 Portable Hole 07-08 Cauldron of Rebirth
90 Staff
of Power
41-42 Potion of Clairvopance 09-10 Cloak of Arachnida
91-92 Sta ff and
of Thunder
43-44 Potion of Diminution 2 Crystal Ball
Lightning
45-46 Potion of Gaseous Form B Dancing Sword
93-94 Tome of Clear Thought
a7 Potion of Giant Strength 4 Efreeti Bottle
95-97 Wand of Polymorph
(fire) 98-00 Wand of the War Mage, +3

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 327

ARCANA—LEGENDARY ‘1d100 Item ‘1d100 Item
1100 Item
41-50 Shield of Expression 19-20 Berserker Axe
01-04 Apparatus of Kwalish
51-60 Silvered Weapon 21-22 Daern's Instant Fortress
05-08 Cloak of Invisibility
61-70 ‘Smoldering Armor 23-25 Dagof
ger
Venom
09-12 Crystal Ball of Mind
71-80 Sylvan Talon 26-28 Dragon Slayer
Reading
81-90 Veteran's Cane 29-31 Elven Chain
B16 Crystal Ball of Telepathy
91-00 Walloping Ammunition 32-34 Enspelled Armor (level 2
17-20 Crystal Ball of True Seeing
or 3 spell)
21-22 Cubic Gate ARMAMENTS—UNCOMMON 35-37 Enspelled Weapon (level 2
23 Deck of Many Things 1d100 Item or 3 spell)
24-27 Enspelled Staff (level 6, 7, 01-04 ‘Adamantine Armor 38-40 Flame Tongue
or8 spell) 05-08 Adamantine Weapon 41-43 Giant Slayer
28-31 loun Stone (greater ab- 09-13 Ammunition, +1 44-46 Horn of Blasting
sorption, mastery, or
4-18 Bracers of Archery 47-48 Horn of Valhalla (brass or
regeneration)
19-23 Enspelled Armor (cantrip silver)
32-33 tron Flask
or level 1 spell) 49-51 loun Stone (protection)
34-41 Potion of Giant Strength
24-28 Enspelled Weapon (cantrip 52-54 Mace of Disruption
(storm)
or level 1 spell)
42-45 Ring of Djinni Summoning
55-57 Mace of Smiting
29-33 Gauntlets of Ogre Power
58-60 Mace of Terror
46-49 Ring of Elemental Com-
34-38 Javelin of Lightning
‘mand (air, earth, fire, or 61-63 Potion of Giant Strength
39-43 Mariner's Armor (fire)
water)
44-48 Mithral Armor 64-66 Potion of Giant Strength
50-53 Ring of Invisibility
49-53 Potion of Giant Strength (frost or stone)
54-57 Ring of Spell Turning
(hill) 67-69 Potion of Heroism
58 Ring of Three Wishes
54-58 Potion of Pugilism 70-72 Potion of invulnerability
59 Robe of the Archmagi
59-62 Quiver of Ehlonna 73-75 Ring of Protection
60-61 Scroll of Titan Summoning
63-66 Saddle of the Cavalier 76-78 Ring of the Ram
62-65 Sovereign Glue
67-71 Sentinel Shield 79-81 Shield, +2
66-83 Spell Scroll (level 9 spell)
72-76 Shield, +1 82-84 Shield of Missile Attraction
84 Sphere of Annihilation
77-81 Sword of Vengeance 85-86 Sun Blade
85 Staff
of the Magi
82-85 Trident of Fish Command 87-88 Sword of Life Stealing
86-88 Talisman of the Sphere
86-90 Weapon, +1 89-90 Sword of Wounding
89-92 Tome of the Stilled Tongue
91-95 Weapon of Warning 91-92 Tentacle Rod
93-96 Universal Solvent
96-00 Wraps of Unarmed 93-94 Vicious Weapon
97-00 Well of Many Worlds
Power, +7
95-97 Weapon, +2
ARMAMENTS TABLES
ARMAMENTS—RARE 98-00 Wraps of Unarmed
Power, +2
ARMAMENTS—COMMON 1100 Item
1100 Item 01-03 Ammunition, +2
ARMAMENTS—VeRY RARE
o1-10 Armor of Gleaming 04-07 Armor, +1 1d100 Item
11-20 Cast-Off Armor 08-10 Armor of Resistance 01-03 Ammunition, +3
21-30 Dread Helm n-13 Armor of Vulnerability 04-06 Ammunition of Slaying
31-40 Moon-Touched Sword 4-5 ‘Arrow-Catching Shield 07-09 Animated Shield
16-18 Belt of Giant Strength 10-12 Armor, +2
(rill)

328 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

‘1d100 Item 1d100 Item 1100 Item

3-14 Belt of Giant Strength 3-18 Belt of Giant Strength 35-36 Orb of Direction

(fre) (cloud) 37-38 Orb of Time
15-17 Belt of Giant Strength 19-21 Belt of Giant Strength 39-40 Perfume of Bewitching
(frost or stone) (storm)
41-42 Pipe of Smoke Monsters
18-19 Dancing Sword 22-27 Defender
43-44 Pole of Angling
20-22 Demon Armor 28-33 Efreeti Chain
45-46 Pole of Collapsing
23-25 Dragon Scale Mail 34-39 Enspelled Armor (level 6,
47-52 Potion of Climbing
26-28 Dwarven Plate 7, 0r8 spell)
53-58 Potion of Comprehension
29-31 Dwarven Thrower 40-45 Enspelled Weapon (level 6,
59-74 Potion of Healing
7, or 8 spell)
32-34 Energy Bow
Prosthetic Limb
75-16
46-51 Hammer of Thunderbolts
35-37. Enspelled Armor (level 4
77-18 Rope of Mending
52-56 Holy Avenger
or 5S spell)
79-80 Sta ff s
of Birdcall
Enspelled Weapon (level 4 57-62 Horn of Valhalla (iron)
38-40
81-82 Sylvan Talon
or 5 spell) 63-68 Luck Blade
83-84 Talking Doll
1-43 Executioner’s Axe 69-72 Moonblade
85-86 Tankard of Sobriety
44-46 Frost Brand 73-78 Plate Armor of
Etherealness 87-90 Veteran's Cane
47-49 Horn of Valhalla (bronze)
79-87 Potion of Giant Strength 91-93 Walloping Ammunition
50-52 loun Stone (strength)
(storm) 94-96 Wand of Conducting
53-55 Lute of Thunderous
88-90 Rod of Lordly Might 97-00 Wand of Pyrotechnics
Thumping

56-58 Manual of Gainful Exercise 91-95 Sword of Answering
IMPLEMENTS—UNCOMMON
Nine Lives Stealer 96-00 Vorpal Sword
59-61
14100. Item
62-64 Oathbow
01-02 Alchemy Jug
65-68 Oil of Sharpness
03-06 Ammunition, +1
IMPLEMENTS—COMMON
69-72 Potion of Giant Strength
14100 Item
07-10 Bag of Holding
(cloud)
Bead of Nourishment n-12 Boots of Elvenkind
of the 01-02
73-75 Quarterstaff
03-04 Bead of Refreshment Ba4 Boots of Striding and
Acrobat
Springing
76-78 Scimitar of Speed 05-06 Boots of False Tracks
15-16 Boots of the Winterlands
79-82 Shield, +3 07-08 Candle of the Deep
WB Broom of Flying
83-85 Shield of the Cavalier 09-10 Charlatan's Die
19-20 Cap of Water Breathing
86-88 Spellguard Shield n-3 Cloak of Many Fashions
21-22 Cloak of Elvenkind
39-91 ‘Sword of Sharpness 45 Clockwork Amulet
23-24 Cloak of Protection
92-94 Thunderous Greatclub 16-17 Ear Horn of Hearing
25-26 Cloak of the Manta Ray
95-97 Weapon, +3 18-19 Ersatz Eye
27 Decan ter
of Endless Water
98-00 Wraps of Unarmed 20-21 Heward's Handy Spice
Pouch 28-30 Drifiglobe
Power, +3

22-23 Horn of Silent Alarm 31-32 Dust of Disappearance
ARMAMENTS—LEGENDARY 33-34 Dust of Dryness
24-25 Instrument ofIllusions
1d100. Item 35-36 and
Dust of Sneezing
26-27 Instrument of Scribing
01-06 Armor, +3 Choking
28-29 Lock of Trickery
07-12 Armor of invulnerability 37-38 Enspelled Weapon (cantrip
30-32 Moon-Touched Sword
or level 1 spell)
33-34 Mystery Key
39-40 Eyes of Minute Seeing

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 329

14100 Item 14100 Item ‘1d100 Item
4-42 Eyes of the Eagle 33-36 Folding Boat 87-93 Potion of Speed
43-44 Gloves of Missile Snaring 37-40 Glamoured Studded 94-00 Tome of Leadership and

| 45-46 Gloves of Swimming and Leather Influence

1 Climbing 41-44 Heward's Handy
Haversack IMPLEMENTS—LEGENDARY
|
47-48 Gloves of Thievery
1100 Item
49-50 Goggles of Night 45-48 Horseshoes of Speed

49-52 Instrument of the Bards
01-17 Enspelled Weapon (level 6,
51 Hag Eye
(Canaith mandolin or Cli
7, 0r8 spell)
52-54 Helm of Comprehending
lyre) 18-34 Instrument of the Bards
Languages
(Ollamh harp)
53-56 oun Stone (awareness)
55 Immovable Rod
35-54 Sovereign Glue
57-60 Portable Hole
56-57 Instrument of the
55-70 Sphere of Annihilation
Bards (Doss lute, 61-64 Potion of Diminution
7-83 Talisman of the Sphere
Fochlucan bandore, or 65-68 Potion of Gaseous Form
Mac-Fuirmidh cittern) 84-00 Universal Solvent
69-76 Potion of Healing
58-59 Lantern of Revealing (superior)
RELICS TABLES
60-61 Nature's Mantle 77-80 Quaal's Feather Token

62-63 Oil of Slipperiness (bird, swan boat, or whip) Retics—ComMOoN

81-84 Ring of Evasion 1d100 Item
64-65 Pipes of Haunting
Pipes of the Sewers 85-88 Ring of Free Action 01-08 Ear Horn of Hearing
66-67

89-92 Rope of Entanglement 09-28 Potion of Healing
68-71 Potion of Growth
93-96 Staff
of Healing 29-36 Pot of Awakening
72-80 Potion of Healing
(greater) 97-00 Wand of Enemy Detection 37-44 Ruby of the War Mage

81-84 Potion of Water Breathing 45-52 Shield of Expression
ImPLEMENTS—VerY RARE
85-86 Quaal’s Feather Token 53-60 ‘Smoldering Armor
14100 Item
(anchor, fan, or tree) 61-80 Spell Scroll (cantrip or
01-07 Ammunition, +3, level 1 spell)
87-88 Ring ofJumping
89-90 Ring of Swimming
08-14 Bag of Devouring 81-90 Staff
of Adornment

91-92 Ring of Warmth
15-21 Carpet of Flying 91-00 Staff
of Flowers
22-28 Enspelled Weapon (level 4
93-94 Robe of Useful Items
or 5 spell) ReLics—UNCOMMON
95-96 Rope of Climbing
29-35 Horseshoes ofa Zephyr 1d100 Item
97-98 Stone of Good Luck
36-42 Instrument of the Bards 01-05 Enspelled Staff (cantrip or
99-00 Wand of Secrets
(Anstruth harp) level 1 spell)

43-49 foun Stone (agility) 06-10 Keoghtom’s Ointment
IMPLEMENTS—RARE
50-56 Lute of Thunderous Ws Mariner's Armor
1100 Item
Thumping 16-20 Nature's Mantle
01-04 Ammunition, +2
57-63 Manual of Quickness of 2-25 Pearl of Power
05-08 Bag of Beans
Action
26-30 Periapt of Health
09-12 Belt of Dwarvenkind
64-70 Nolzur's Marvelous
31-35 Periapt of Wound Closure
13-16 Boots of Levitation Pigments
36-40 Potion ofAnimal
17-20 Boots of Speed
n-77 Potion of Flying Friendship
21-24 Chime of Opening
78-86 Potion of Healing
41-55 Potion of Healing
25-28 Dimensional Shackles (supreme)
(greater)
29-32 Enspelled Weapon (level 2
56-60 Potion of Resistance
or 3 spell)

330 CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE

14100 Item 14100 Item ‘1d100 Item
61-65 Ring of Water Walking 52-54 Ring of Animal Influence 44-50 Potion of Vitality
66-70 Sending Stones 55-58 Ring of Resistance 51-55 Rod of Alertness
71-80 Spell Scroll (level 2 or 3 59-61 Ring of Spell Storing 56-65 Spell Scroll (level 6, 7, or
spell) 8 spell)
62-65 Scroll of Protection
81-85 Staf
of the
f Adder 66-70 Spirit Board
66-73 Spell Scroll (level 4 or 5
86-90 Staff
of the Python spell) ns Staff
of Fire
91-95 Wand of Magic Detection 74-76 Staff
of Charming 76-80 Staff
of Frost
96-00 Wand of the War Mage, +1 77-79 Staff
of Healing 81-85 Staff
of Striking
80-82 Sta
of Swarming
ff Insects 86-90 Sta
of Thunder
ff and
ReLics—RareE
83-85 Staff
of the Woodlands Lightning
14100. Item
86-88 Staff
of Withering 91-95 Tome of Understanding
01-03 Amulet of Health
89-90 Stone of Controlling Earth 96-00 Wand of the War Mage, +3
04-07 Armor, +1
Elementals
08-09 Bowl of Commanding Wa- RELICS—LEGENDARY
91-93 Tentacle Rod
ter Elementals 1100 Item
94-96 Wand of Paralysis
10-11 Brazier of Commanding 01-08 Armor of Invulnerability
Fire Elementals
97-00 Wand of the War Mage, +2
09-18 Armor, +3
12-13 Censer of Controlling Air
Retics—Very RARE 19-27 Enspelled Staff (level 6, 7,
Elementals
1d100 Item or 8 spell)
14-16 Elixir of Health
01-05 Armor, +2 28-36 Holy Avenger
7-19 Enspelled Staff (level 2 or
06-10 Candle of Invocation 37-45 Horn of Valhalla (iron)
3 spell)
n-15 Cauldron of Rebirth 46-54 Rod of Resurrection
20-22 Horn of Blasting
16-20 Enspelled Staff (level 4 or 55-63 Scarab of Protection
23-25 Horn of Valhalla (brass or
5 spell) 64-72 Scroll of Titan Summoning
silver)
21-25 Horn of Valhalla (bronze) 73-80 Spell Scroll (level 9 spell)
26-28 Joun Stone (reserve or
sustenance)
26-30 Joun Stone (insight) 81-90 Talisman of Pure Good

29-31 Mace of Disruption 31-35 Manual of Bodily Health 91-00 Talisman of Ultimate Evil

32-34 Mace of Smiting 36-43 Potion of Healing
(supreme)
35-37 Mace of Terror

38-40 Necklace of Prayer Beads

41-43 Periopt of Proof against
Poison

44-51 Potion of Healing
(superior)

CHAPTER 7 | TREASURE 331

CHAPTER 8

BASTIONS
BASTION IS A LOCATION THAT BELONGS them~a Paladin’s Bastion might be similar toa Cler-
toa player character: a home, a stronghold, ie’s shrine but as fortified as a Fighter's stronghold.
anda place of power that the character And multiple characters can combine their Bastions
develops over the course of a campaign. A Bas- to form a single large structure (see “Bastion Map”).
tion offers a character temporary refuge from the Every Bastion has facilities that serve basic needs
dangerous world of adventuring, and it provides as well as special ones, such as libraries, menageries,
opportunities for a character to craft magic items, and workshops (see “Basic Facilities” and “Special
conduct research, harvest poisons, build ships, and Facilities”).
carry out a range of other activities.
‘As DM, you decide whether Bastions are avail- BASTION TURNS
able in a campaign. Bastions are best suited to As time passes in the campaign, players take Bas-
campaigns that allow characters to return to their
tion turns to reflect the activity occurring in their
Bastions during intervals when they're not actively Bastions, whether or not the characters are present.
adventuring. Not every character needs to have Ona Bastion turn, a character can issue orders to
a Bastion, It's fine for some players in your cam- the special facilities in their Bastion or issue the
paign to opt in to Bastion ownership and others to Maintain order to the entire Bastion (see “Orders’).
opt out.

There's no need to choose between going on ad- FREQUENCY OF BASTION TURNS
ventures and commanding a Bastion; a character
By default, a Bastion turn occurs every
7 days of
can do both at once. A Bastion has special facilities
in-game time. Here are common examples of players
that generate benefits, and these facilities can also
taking one or more Bastion turns:
undertake projects while the character is otherwise
‘occupied. + The characters are on a long journey away from
Most importantly, a Bastion is a creative play- their Bastions. After the characters have been
ground for a player and a shared storytelling space away for 7 days, you might say, “Time for a
in the campaign, Be as permissive as you can with Bastion turn. Since you're not there, we'll assume
the stories players tell in their Bastions, but players you issue the Maintain order for your Bastions.”
should know their control might be limited by the ‘Then roll for events as described in the “Bastion
campaign's larger story, which you strive to make Events” section in this chapter.
fun for everyone. + The characters spend 7 days or more in their
Bastions between adventures. You might say,
GAINING A BASTION “You have six weeks to spend in your Bastions. Go
ahead and resolve six Bastion turns.”
If you allow Bastions in your campaign, characters
+ The characters return to their Bastions in the
acquire their Bastions when they reach level 5. You
midst of an adventure. You might say, “You have
and the players can decide together how these Bas-
just enough time to take a Bastion turn before you
tions come into being. A character might inherit or
eave again in the morning.”
receive a parcel of land on which to build their Bas-
+ The characters are adventuring near their Bas-
tion (see “Marks of Prestige” in chapter 5), or they
tions and resting in their Bastions at night. You
might take a preexisting structure and refurbish
might say, “It's been a week since your last Bastion
it. It's fair to assume that work has been going on
turn, so you can take one now.”
behind the scenes of the campaign during a char-
acter’s early adventuring career, so the Bastion is You can slow the frequency of Bastion turns to bet-
ready when the character reaches level 5. ter serve the needs of your players and your cam-
The shape, style, and function of a character's paign. For example, if the characters have months
Bastion are up to the player to determine. For ex- between adventures, you can call for a Bastion turn
ample, a Wizard might build a tower, a Cleric might every month instead of every 7 days, so the char-
establish a shrine, a Fighter might build a fortified acters aren't issuing so many orders or reaping too
keep or similar stronghold, and a Rogue might many benefits at once.
establish a guildhall or lodge. Characters of other
classes might choose one of these forms or combine

CHAPTER
8 | BASTIONS 333

‘A Roave’s Bastion ON THE OUTSKIRTS
OF TOWN
CONTAI
A GUILOMALL,
NS A PUB, ANO Mone!

Bastion is completely enclosed by defensive walls
and it comes under attack (see “Bastion Events" at
Encourage play
the end of this chapter), reduce by 2 the number
characters’ Bastions, configuring its facilities as
of dice rolled to determine how many Bastion
they see fit and using the same technique:
Defenders are lost in the attack
ee “Dungeons” in chapter
Doors and Windows. Each facility comes with one
3 and “Adventure Maps” in chapter
4)
or more doors and shuttered windows, placed
In addition to basic and special facilities (de-
wherever the player sees fit. See “Doors” in chap-
scribed later
in this chapter),a Bastion can have the
ter 3 for kinds of doors to choose from, including
following features:
locked doors, secret doors, and portcullises. These
Closets. A basic or special facility can have one o features are free
more closets,washrooms,
or similar enclosures.
‘The closets must be inside the facility and can’t COMBINING BasTIONS
increase the facility's area in squares. These fea ‘Two or more players can combine their characters’
tures are free. Bastions into a single structure. Doing so doesn't
Corridors, Ramps, and Staircases. A facility can change the number
of special facilities each Bas-
contain one or more corridors, ramps, or stair- tion can have, how those special facilities work, or
ses leading to other facilities in the Bastion. who issues orders to each Bastion. Each Bastion
These features are free. retains its own hirelings, which can’t be sent to or
Defensive Walls. A character can add defensive shared with another Bastion. Bastion Defenders
walls around their Bastion. A defensive wall is are handled differently: if some event deprives one
20 feet high and may inclu
a walkway
de along its character's Bastion of defenders, another character
top, with a means to access it (such as a ladder or can apply all or some of those losses to their Bastion
ft), Each 5-foot square of defensive wall takes instead, provided the two Bastions are combined,
10 days to build and costs 250 GP. Ifa character's

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

FAcILiTy SPACE ENLARGING Basic FACILITIES
‘The amount of space in a basic or special facility There is no in-game benefit to enlarging a basic
determines its maximum area in 5-foot squares, facility, but a character might enlarge a facility for
as shown in the Facility Space table. A player can cosmetic reasons or to increase the Bastion's size.
configure the squares of
a facility as they please ‘A character can spend money and time to increase
on their Bastion’s map. The squares can be stacked the space of
a basic facility in their Bastion by one
so that a facility's area is distributed over multiple category, as shown on the table below.
levels or stories.
Space Increase Cost Time Required

Facitity Space Cramped to Roomy 500 GP 25 days

Space Maximum Area Roomy to Vast 2,000 GP 80 days

Cramped 4 squares,
Roomy 16 squares SPECIAL FACILITIES
Special facilities are Bastion locations where certain
Vast 36 squares
activities yield game benefits. A character's Bastion
initially has two special facilities of the character's
Basic FACILITIES choice for which they qualify. Each special facility
A character's Bastion starts with two free basic fa- can be chosen only once unless its description says
cilities, which the character's player chooses from otherwise.
the Basic Facilities list below. One of the chosen fa- Unlike basic facilities, special facilities can't be
cilities is Cramped, and the other is Roomy (see the bought; a character gains them through level ad-
Facility Space table). A Bastion can have more than vancement. At level 9, a character gains two ad-
one of each basic facility. ditional special facilities of their choice for which
they qualify; they gain one additional facility at
Basic Facitiries level 13 and another at level 17. The Special Facility
Bedroom Dining Room — Parlor Acquisition table shows the total number of special
Courtyard kitchen Storage facilities in a character's Bastion. Each new special
facility immediately becomes part of the character's
A basic facility comes with nonmagical furnishings
Bastion when the character reaches the level.
and decor appropriate for that facility.
Each time a character gains a level, that character
Basic facilities don’t have any game effects, but
can replace one oftheir Bastion’s special fac
they can inspire roleplaying opportunities and en-
with another for which the character qualifies.
hance a Bastion’s verisimilitude. A Bastion with a
kitchen is functionally the same as one without, but
‘SPECIAL FACILITY ACQUISITION
the former gives you and your players a fun setting
to start game sessions, have in-character discus- Special
sions, or introduce new NPCs.
Level level Facilities
A character can add new basic facilities or enlarge 5 2 B 5
existing ones by spending money and time, as dis-
9 4 7 6
cussed in the sections that follow. Any number of
basic facilities can be added or enlarged at the same REQUIREMENTS
time. A character doesn't need to be in their Bastion
Each special facility has a level. A character must
while basic facilities are being added or enlarged.
be that level or higher to gain that facility. A special
ADDING Basic FACILITIES facility might also have a prerequisite the character
must meet to gain that facility. For example, only a
A character can add a basic facility to their Bastion
character who can use an Arcane Focus or a tool as
by spending money and time. The cost of adding a
a Spellcasting Focus can have an Arcane Study.
basic facility and the time required depend on the
facility's space, as shown on the table below. SPACE
Facility Space Cost Time Required A special facility occupies a certain amount of
Cramped 500. GP 20 days space (see “Facility Space”). A player can configure
the squares of a special facility as desired on the
Roomy 1,000 GP 45 days
Bastion’s map. A special facility can be enlarged to
Vast 3,000 GP 125 days grant additional benefits ifits description says so.

CHAPTERS | BASTIONS 335

HIRELINGS Research. lings in the special facility gather
information.
A special facility comes with one or more hirelings
Trade. Hirelings buy and sell goods or services
who work in the facility, maintain it, and execute
stored or produced in this special facility.
Bastion orders there, as described in the next sec-
tion. A player can assign names and personalities to SPECIAL FACILITy DESCRIPTIONS
hirelings in their character's Bastion using the same
Special facilities are presented in alphabetical or-
tools DMs use to create NPCs (see chapter 3).
der. The Special Facilities table lists all the special
Each special facility in a Bastion generates enough
facilities presented in this section, along with their
income to pay the salary of its hirelings. Hirelings
prerequisites and orders. Some facilities confer ad~
follow the orders they're given and are loyal to the
ditional benefits, specified in their descriptions.
Bastion’s owner.

ORDERS
ARCANE STUDY
On a Bastion turn, a character in their Bastion can
Level 5 Bastion Facility
issue special orders—called Bastion orders—to one
or more of their Bastion's special facilities. A char- Prerequisite: Ability to use an Arcane Focus or tool as
a Spellcasting Focus
acter needn't issue orders to all the special facilities
Space: Roomy
in their Bastion on a given Bastion turn.
The Maintain order is unusual; it is issued to the Hirelings: 1
Order: Craft
whole Bastion rather than to one or more special
facilities. If a character isn't in their Bastion on a An Arcane Study is a place ofquiet research that
given Bastion turn, the Bastion acts as though it contains one or more desks and bookshelves.
were issued the Maintain order on that turn unless Arcane Study Charm. After spending a Long Rest
the owner can communicate with the Bastion hire- in your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see
lings using the Sending spell or similar magic. “Supernatural Gifts” in chapter 3) that lasts for 7
The orders are as follows: days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to
Craft. Hirelings in the special facility craft an item cast Identify without expending a spell slot or using
that can be made in that facility. During the time Material components. You can't gain this Charm
required to craft an item, the facility can’t be used again while you still have it.
to craft anything else, even if a special ability al- Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to
lows the facility to carry out two orders at once. this facility, choose one of the following options:
‘The hirelings have proficiencies with Artisan's Craft: Arcane Focus. You commission the facility's
Tools as specified in the facility's description. hireling to craft an Arcane Focus. The work takes
Empower. The special facility confers a temporary 7 days and costs no money. The Arcane Focus re-
empowerment to you or someone else. mains in your Bastion until you claim it.
Harvest. Hirelings gather a resource produced in Craft: Book. You commission the facility's hireling
the special facility. During the time required to to craft a blank book. The work takes 7 days and
harvest a resource, the facility can't be used to costs you 10 GP. The book remains in your Bas-
harvest anything else, even if a special ability al- tion until you claim it.
lows the facility to carry out two orders at once. Craft: Magic Item (Arcana). If you are level 9+, you
Maintain, All the Bastion’s hirelings focus on main- can commission the facility's hireling to craft a
taining the Bastion rather than executing orders Common or an Uncommon magic item chosen by
in special facilities. Issuing this order prohibits you from the Arcana tables in chapter 7. The facil-
other orders from being issued to the Bastion on ity has the tool required to craft the item, and the
the current Bastion turn. Each time the Maintain hireling has proficiency with that tool as well as
order is issued, the DM rolls once on the Bastion proficiency in the Arcana skill. See the “Crafting
Events table at the end of this chapter. Bastion Magic Items” section in chapter 7 for the time and
events are resolved before the next Bastion turn, money that must be spent to craft the item, If the
Recruit. Hirelings recruit creatures to the Bastion. item allows its user to cast any spells from it, you
These creatures might include one or more Bas- must craft the item yourself (the facility’s hireling
tion Defenders, whose main purpose is to defend can assist), and you must have all those spells pre-
the Bastion if it is attacked (see “Bastion Events” pared every day you spend crafting the item.
at the end of this chapter). The Bastion generates
enough income to provide for the needs of its Bas-
tion Defenders.

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

SPECIAL FACILITIES
Level Special Facility Prerequisite Order
5 Arcane Study Ability to use an Arcane Focus or a tool as a Craft
Spellcasting Focus
Armory None Trade

Barrack None Recruit

Garden None Harvest

Library None Research,

Sanctuary Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus Craft
as a Spellcasting Focus

Smithy None Craft
Storehouse None Trade

Workshop None Craft
Gaming Hall None Trade

Greenhouse None Harvest

Laboratory None* Craft
Sacristy to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus Craft
as a Spellcasting Focus
Scriptorium None* Craft

Stable None Trade
Teleportation Circle None Recruit

Theater None Empower

Training Area None Empower

9 Trophy Room None Research

B Archive None Research

B Meditation Chamber None Empower

B Menagerie None Recruit,

B Observatory Ability to use a Spellcasting Focus Empower

B Pub None Research

B Reliquary Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus Harvest

as a Spellcasting Focus
W Demiplane Ability to use an Arcane Focus or a tool as a Empower
Spellcasting Focus

W Guildhall Expertise in a skill Recruit

W7 Sanctum Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus Empower
as a Spellcasting Focus

v7 ‘War Room. Fighting Style feature or Unarmored Defense Recruit
feature

Certain orders that can be issued to these facilities have additional prerequisites

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS 337

spells, magic items, eldritch symbols, magical
ARCHIVE traditions, and planes of existence.
Level 13 Bastion Facility ‘The Chronepsis Chronicles. You have Advantage on
any Intelligence (History) check you make when
Prerequisite: None
you take the Study action to recall lore about
Space: Roomy
historical events, legendary people, ancient king-
Hirelings: 1
doms, past disputes, wars, and lost civilizations.
Order: Research
Investigations of the Inquisitive. You have Advantage
An Archive is a repository of books, maps, and on any Intelligence (Investigation) check you
scrolls. It is usually attached to a Library behind a make when you take the Study action to make
locked or secret door. deductions based on clues or evidence or to recall
Research: Helpful Lore. When you issue the Re- lore about traps, ciphers, riddles, and gadgetry.
search order to this facility, you commission the Material Musings on the Nature of the World. You have
facility's hireling to search the Archive for lore. The ‘Advantage on any Intelligence (Nature) check
work takes 7 days. The hireling gains knowledge as you make when you take the Study action to re-
if they had cast the Legend Lore spell, then shares call lore about terrain, plants, animals, and the
this knowledge with you the next time you speak weather.
with them. The Old Faith and Other Religions. You have Advan-
Reference Book. Your Archive contains one copy tage on any Intelligence (Religion) check you
ofa reference book, which gives you a benefit make when you take the Study action to recall
you and the book are in your Bastion. You lore about deities, rites and prayers, hierarchies,
can choose one of the following options (your DM holy symbols, and the practices of secret cults.
might make more options available):
Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Ar-
Bigby’s Handy Arcana Codex. You have Advantage on chive to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you
any Intelligence (Arcana) check you make when do so, you gain two additional reference books cho-
you take the Study action to recall lore about sen from the list above.

338 CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

ARMORY
BARRACK
Level 5 Bastion Facility
Level 5 Bastion Facility
Prerequisite: None
Prerequisite: None
‘Space: Roomy
Space: Roomy
Hirelings:1
Hirelings: 1
Order: Trade
Order: Recruit
An Armory contains mannequins for disp
laying A Bastion can have more than one Barrack, each of
armor, hooks for holding Shields, racks for
storing which is furnished to serve as sleeping quar
ters for
weapons, and chests for holding ammunition.
up to twelve Bastion Defenders,
Trade: Stock Armory. When you issue the Trade
Recruit: Bastion Defenders. Each time you issue
order to this facility, you commission the facility's
the Recruit order to this facility, up to four Bas-
hireling to stock the Armory with armor, Shields,
tion Defenders are recruited to your Bastion and
weapons, and ammunition. This equipment costs
assigned quarters in this Barrack. The recr
uitment
you 100 GP plus an extra 100 GP for each Bastion
costs no money. You can't issue the Recruit order
to
Defender in your Bastion. If your Bastion has a
this facility if it’s fully occupied.
Smithy, the total cost is halved.
Keep track of the Bastion Defenders housed in
While your Armory is stocked, your Bastion De-
each of your Barracks. If you lose Bastion Defend-
fenders are harder to kill. When any event caus
es ers, deduct them from your roster. Assign names
you to roll dice to determine if your Bastion loses
and personalities to your Bastion Defenders as you
one or more ofits defenders (see “Bastion Events”
see fit.
at the end of this chapter), roll 1d8 in place of each
Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Bar-
46 you would normally roll. When the event is over,
rack to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. A Vast
the equipment in your Armory is expended rega
rd- Barrack can accommodate up to twenty-five
Bas-
less of how many Bastion Defenders you have or
tion Defenders
how many you lost, leaving your Armory
depleted
until you issue another Trade order to the facility
and pay the cost to restock it.

CHAPTER
8 | BASTIONS

A Gaming Hall offers recreational activities like
DEMIPLANE chess and games of darts, cards, or dice.
Level 17 Bastion Facility ‘Trade: Gambling Hall. When you issue the Trade
order to this facility, the facility's hirelings turn the
Prerequisite: Ability to use an Arcane Focus or a tool
Gaming Hall into a gambling den for 7 days. At the
asa Spellcasting Focus
end of the seventh day, roll 14100 and consult the
Space: Vast
following table to determine your portion of the
Hirelings: 1
house's winnings.
Order: Empower
1a100 Winnings 14100 Winnings
A door up to 5 feet wide and 10 feet tall appears on
a flat, solid surface in one of the other facilities in 01-50 1d6x10GP_ 86-95 4d6
x 10GP
your Bastion. You choose the location. If you are in 51-85 2d6x 10 GP 96-00 10d6
x 10 GP
your Bastion during a Bastion turn, you ean relo~
cate this door to another facility in your Bastion.
Only you and your Bastion’s hirelings can open GARDEN
the door, which leads to a Demiplane that takes the Level 5 Bastion Facility
form of a stone room. The Demiplane exists in an
Prerequisite: None
extradimensional space and therefore isn't attached
Space: Roomy
physically to other locations in your Bastion, Nei-
Hirel
ther the Demiplane nor its door can be dispelled.
Order: Harvest
Empower: Arcane Resilience. When you issue the
Empower order to this facility, magical runes ap- A Bastion can have more than one Garden. Each
pear on the Demiplane's walls and last for 7 days. time you add a Garden to your Bastion, choose its
Until the runes disappear, you gain Temporary Hit type from the options in the Garden Types table.
Points equal to five times your level after spending While in your Bastion, you can instruct the facili-
an entire Long Rest in the Demiplane. ty’s hireling to change the Garden from one type to
Fabrication. While in the Demiplane, you can take another. This work takes 21 days, during which time
a Magic action to create a nonmagical object of no other activity can occur in this facility.
your choice from nothing, causing it to appear in an Harvest: Garden Growth. When you issue the
unoccupied space in the Demiplane. The object can Harvest order to this facility, you commission the
be no bigger than 5 feet in any dimension; can't have facility’s hireling to collect items from the Garden
a value over 5 GP; and must be made of wood, stone, as noted in the Garden Types table. The work takes
clay, porcelain, glass, paper, nonprecious crystal, or 7 days and costs no money.
nonprecious metal. You must finish a Long Rest be- Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Gar-
fore you can take this action again. den to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. A Vast
Garden is equivalent to two Roomy Gardens and
can include two of the same type of Garden or two
Gaminc HALL different types. When you issue the Harvest order
Level 9 Bastion Facility to a Vast Garden, each component garden produces
Prerequisite: None its own harvest. A Vast Garden gains one additional
Space: Vast hireling.
Hirelings: 4
Order: Trade

GARDEN Types
Garden Type Description Harvest

Decorative Aesthetically pleasing garden full of flowers Ten exquisite floral bouquets (worth 5 GP each),
and topiaries. ten vials of Perfume, or ten Candles

Food Garden of delicious mushrooms or 100 days worth of Rations
vegetables

Herb Garden of rare herbs, some of which have Herbs that are used to create either ten Healer's
medicinal uses Kits or one Potion of Healing
Poison Garden stocked with plants and fungi from Plants that are used to create either two vials of
which poisons and antitoxin can be extracted Antitoxin or one vial of Basic Poison

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

made from healing herbs. Th
e work takes 7 days
GREENHOUSE
and costs no money,
Level 9 Bastion Facility
Harvest: Poison. You commissio
n the facility's
Prerequisite: None hireling to extract one applicati
on ofa poison
Space: Roomy from rare plants or fungi. Choose the
type of poi-
Hirelings: 1 son from the following options: Ass
assin’s Blood,
Order: Harvest Malice, Pale Tincture, or Trut
h Serum. See “Poi
son’ in chapter 3 for each poison
A Greenhouse is an enclosure wh ’s effect. Once
ere rare plants and harvested, the poison can be contained
fungi are nurtured in a contro in a vial.
lled climate. The work takes 7 days and costs no mon
Fruit of Restoration. One pla ey.
nt in your Green-
house has three magical fruits growin
g on it. Any
creature that eats one of
these fruits gains the ben- GumpHaLt
efit of a Lesser Restoration spell.
Fruits that aren't Level 17 Bastion Facility
eaten within 24 hours ofbeing
picked lose their
magic. The plant replaces all pic Prerequisite: Expertise in a skill
ked fruits daily at
dawn, and it can't be transplanted Space: Vast
without killing it.
Harvest Options. When you iss Hirelings: 1
ue the Harvest
order to this facility, choose one of Order: Recruit
the following
options: A Guildhall comes with a guild, for
which you are
Harvest: Healing Herbs. You co the guild master. Choose the typ
mmission the facil- e ofguild from
ity's hireling to create a Potion the options in the Sample Guilds
of Healing (greater) table, or work
with your DM to create anew gui
ld. The facility is

SAMPLE Guitos
Guild Symbol Assignment
Adventurers’ Guild Lit torch You send adventurers to track down
a Beast that has a Challenge Rating
of
2 or lower and is known to lair wit
hin 50 miles of your Bastion. The
ad-
venturers slay orcapture the cre
ature (your choice) in 1d6
+ 1 day s. Ifthe
reature is slain and your Bas
tion has a Trophy Room, you
can add a tro-
Phy taken from the creature to that facility
. Ifthe creature is captured and
your Bastion has a Menagerie, you
can add the cre ature to that facility,
Provided the facility has space to
hous:
Bakers’ Guild Pastry You assign bakers to create bak
ed goods for a prestigious eve
nt that oc-
curs within the next 7 days. You can
receive payment in coin (500 GP)
or
in the form ofa favor owed to you by
the event's host, the details of which
are left
to you and the DM.
Brewers’ Guild Foaming mug You assign brewers to deliver fifty 40-
gallon barrels of ale (worth 10 GP.
each) to your Bastion in 7 days.
Masons’ Guild Stone mask You assign masons to add a def
ensive wall to your Bastion at no
cost.
Alternatively, you can have the masons per
form this work for another
character's Bastion, provided their Bas
tion is within 1 mile of yours. Each
5-foot square ofdefensive wall takes
1 day to build instead of 10 (see
“Bastion Map").
Shipbuilders’ Guild Crossed oars You assign shipbuilders to build one
of the vehicles in the Airborne and
Waterborne Vehicles table ofthe Pla
yer's Handbook. You pay the full cos
t
of the vehicle, and the work takes 1 day per
1,000 GP of the vehicle's cost
(a Rowboat can be made in 1 day).
Thieves’ Guild White key You assign thieves to infiltrate
a location within 50 miles of you
r Bastion
and steal a nonmagical object fro
m it. The obj ect can be no bigger than
5 feet in any dimension and is del
ive red to your Bastion in 146 + 1 day
s,
The DM may decide this activity leaves
you at risk of retaliation from law
‘enforcement or the victim.

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS
34n

a meeting room where members ofyour guild can Craft: Poison. You commission the facility's hire-
discuss important matters in your presence. ling to craft a vial containing one application of a
Your guild has roughly fifty members made up of poison. The poison must be one of the following:
skilled folk who live and work outside your Bastion, Burnt Othur Fumes, Essence of Ether, or Torpor.
usually in nearby settlements. ‘This work takes 7 days, and you must pay half
Recruit: Guild Assignment. Each time you issue the the poison’s cost. See “Poison” in chapter 3 for de-
Recruit order to this facility, you commission the scriptions and costs of poisons.
facility's hireling to recruit guild members to per-
form a special assignment. Each guild in the Sample
Guilds table specifies the nature of that assignment. Lrprary

With your DM's permission and help, you can cre~ Level 5 Bastion Facility
ate new assignments for guild members to complete. Prerequisite: None
Space: Roomy
Hirelings: 1
LaBoraTory Order: Research
Level 9 Bastion Facility
This Library contains a collection of books plus one
Prerequisite: None
or more desks and reading chairs.
Space: Roomy
Research: Topical Lore. When you issue the Re-
Hirelings: 1
search order to this facility, you commission the
Order: Craft facility’s hireling to research a topic. The topic can
A Laboratory contains storage space for alchem- be a legend, a known event or location, a person
ical supplies and workspaces for crafting various of significance, a type of creature, or a famous
concoctions. object. The work takes 7 days. When the research
Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to concludes, the hireling obtains up to three accurate
this facility, choose one of the following options: pieces of information about the topic that were pre-
viously unknown to you and shares this knowledge
Craft: Alchemist’s Supplies. The facility's hireling
with you the next time you speak with them. The
crafts anything that can be made with Alchemist’s DM determines what information you learn,
Supplies, using the rules in the Player's Handbook
and chapter 7 of this book.
MEDITATION CHAMBER
Level 13 Bastion Facility

Space: Cramped
Hirelings: 1
Order: Empower

‘A Meditation Chamber is a relaxing space that helps
align one’s mind, body, and spirit.
Empower: Inner Peace. When you issue the Em-
power order to this facility, your Bastion's hirelings
‘can use the Meditation Chamber to gain a measure
of inner peace. The next time you roll for a Bastion
event, you can roll twice and choose either result.
Fortify Self. You can meditate in this facility over
a period of 7 days. If you leave the Bastion during
this time, you gain no benefit. Otherwise, at the
end of the seventh day, you gain Advantage on two
kinds of saving throws for the next 7 days, deter-
ined randomly by rolling on the table below. Re-
roll if you get a duplicate result.

1d6 Saving Throw 1d6 Saving Throw
pe, A cAULORON 16 s1ANDARO 1 Strength 4 Intelligence
EQUIPMENT IN A POTION
2 Dexterity 5 Wisdom
3 Constitution 6 Charisma

342 CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

MENAGERIE CREATURES

Creature Size Cost
Ape Medium 500 GP
Black Bear Medium 500 GP
Brown Bear Large 1,000 GP
Constrictor Snake Large 250 GP
Crocodile Large 500 GP
Dire Wolf Large 1,000 GP
Giant Vulture Large 1,000 GP
Hyena Medium 50.GP
Jackal ‘Small 50.GP
Lion Large 1,000 GP
Owlbear Large 3,500 GP
Panther Medium 250 GP
Tiger Large 1,000 GP
With the DM's consent, you can add different crea-
tures than those shown in the Menagerie Creatures
table to your Menagerie. The cost of
a creature
depends on its Challenge Rating, as shown on the
Creature Costs by Challenge Rating table. Typically
only Beasts and some Monstrosities can be kept
in a Menagerie, though the DM might allo
‘Twe nooxs iN your Lipmaay HoLo A w other
creatures.

CREATURE Costs BY CHALLENGE RATING
Challenge Challenge
Rating Cost Rati Cost
MENAGERIE
or 1/8 50 GP 1 1,000 GP
Level 13 Bastion Facility
Prerequisite: None V4 250 GP 2 2,000 GP
Space: Vast ye 500 GP 3,500 GP
Hirelings: 2
Order: Recruit
OsseRvaTory
‘A Menagerie has enclosures big enough to contain
Level 13 Bastion Facility
up to four Large creatures. Four Small or Medium
creatures can occupy the same space Prerequisite: Ability to use a Spellcasting Focus
as one Large
creature there. Spac
Recruit: Creature, When you issue the Recruit
order to this facility, you commission the
facility's
Order: Empower
hirelings to add a creature from the Menager
Situated atop your Bastion, your Observatory con-
Creatures table to your Menagerie. The recruitm
ent tains a telescope aimed at the night sky.
takes 7 days and costs you the amount listed in the
Observatory Charm. You can use your Observa-
table. The hirelings look after the creature.
tory to peer into the far corners of Wildspace and
Creatures in your Menagerie count as Bastion
the Astral Plane. After spending a Long Res
Defenders. Deduct any you lose from your Bastion
our Observatory, you gain a magical Cha
Defenders roster. You can choose not to count one rm (see
“Supernatural Gifts” in chapter 3) that lasts for 7
or more ofthese creatures as Bastion Defe
nders, in days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to
which case they can't be called on to defend the Bas-
cast Contact Other Plane without expending a spell
tion. Instead, they act in accordance with their na-
slot. You can't gain this Charm again while you still
ture and use their stat blocks in the Monster
Manual. have it.

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS
343

Empower: Eldritch Discovery. When you issue the Sterner Stuff, For 24 hours after drinking a pint
Empower order to this facility, you enable yourself of this beverage, you automatically succeed on
or the facility's hireling to explore the eldritch mys- saving throws to avoid or end the Frightened
teries of the stars for 7 consecutive nights. At the condition.
end of that time, roll a die. If the number rolled is
At the start ofa Bastion turn, you can switch to one
even, nothing is gained. If the number rolled is odd,
of the other options. Your DM may create new op-
an unknown power bestows one ofthe following
tions. A pint of this magical beverage loses its magic
Charms on you or another creature of your choice
24 hours after it's poured.
that is on the same plane of existence as you: Charm
Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Pub
of Darkvision, Charm of Heroism, or Charm of
toa Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you do so,
Vitality (all described in chapter 3).
the Pub can have two magical beverages from the
Pub Special list on tap at a time. A Vast Pub gains
three additional hirelings, for a total of four. These
Pus
new hirelings are servers. Assign names and per-
Level 13 Bastion Facility
sonalities to them as you see fit.
Prerequisite: None
Space: Roomy
Hirelings: 1 RELIQUARY
Order: Research Level 15 Bastion Facility
Folks come here to consume tasty beverages and Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic
socialize. Your Pub might be a bar, coffee shop, or Focus as a Spellcasting Focus
tearoom, and it might have a colorful name, such as Space: Cramped
the Rusty Flagon or the Dragon's Loft. The facility's Hirelings: 1
hireling, who serves as the bartender, maintains a Order: Harvest
network of spies scattered throughout nearby com-
This vault holds sacred objects.
munities. These spies are useful sources of informa-
Reliquary Charm. After spending a Long Rest in
tion and frequent the Pub, often incognito.
your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see “Su-
Research: Information Gathering. When you issue
pernatural Gifts” in chapter 3) that lasts for 7 days
the Research order to this facility, you commission
or until you use it. The Charm allows you to cast
the Pub’s bartender to gather information from
Greater Restoration once without expending a spell
spies who are aware of important events happen-
slot or using Material components. You can’t gain
ing within 10 miles of your Bastion over the next
this Charm again while you still have it.
7 days. During that time, these spies can divulge
Harvest: Talisman, When you issue the Harvest,
the location of any creature that is familiar to you,
order to this facility, you commission its hireling to
provided the creature is within 50 miles of your
produce a specially prepared talisman for your use.
Bastion and not hidden by magic or confined to a
The talisman usually takes the form of an amulet,
location that the DM deems is beyond the spy net-
arune-carved box, or a statuette, but it can be any
work's ability to locate. If the spies learn the target's.
Tiny, nonmagical object that has religious signifi-
location, they also learn where that creature has
cance. The work takes 7 days and costs no money.
been for the previous 7 days.
You can use this talisman in place of one spell’s Ma-
Pub Special. The Pub has one magical beverage on
terial components, provided the components have
tap, chosen from the options below:
a cost of1,000 GP or less. If the spell normally con-
Bigby's Burden. Drinking a pint ofthis beverage sumes its components, the talisman isn't consumed.
grants you the “enlarge” effect of an Enlarge/Re- After the talisman has been used in this way, it can’t
duce spell that has a duration of 24 hours (no sav- be used again until you return it to your Reliquary
ing throw allowed). and use another Harvest order to prepare it.
Kiss of the Spider Queen. Drinking a pint of this
beverage grants you the effect of a Spider Climb
spell that has a duration of 24 hours. Sacristy
Moonlight Serenade. Drinking a pint of this bev- Level 9 Bastion Facility
erage gives you Darkvision out to 60 feet for 24
Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic
hours. If you already have Darkvision, its range is Focus as a Spelleasting Focus
extended by 60 feet for the same duration.
‘Space: Roomy
Positive Reinforcement. Drinking a pint of this
Hirelings: 1
beverage gives you Resistance to Necrotic damage
Order: Craft
for 24 hours.

344 CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

A Sacristy serves as a preparation and storage room
must have all those spells prepared every day y
for the sacred items and religious vestments. spend crafting the item.
Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to
this facility, choose one ofthe following options: Spell Refreshment. Having a Sacristy allows you
to regain one expended spell slot of level 5 or lower
Craft: Holy Water. You commission the facility's after spending an entire Short Rest in your Bastion.
hireling to craft a flask of Holy Water. The work You can't gain this benefit again until you finish 2
takes 7 days and costs no money. You can spend
Long Rest.
GP during the creation process to increase the
potency of the Holy Water. For every 100 GP you
spend, up to a maximum of 500 GP, the damage SANcTUARY
dealt by the Holy Water increases by 148. Level 5 Bastion Facility
Craft: Magic Item (Relic). You commission the fa-
Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic
cility’s hireling to craft a Common or an Uncom-
Focus as a Spellcasting Focus
‘mon magic item chosen by you from the Relic
s ta-
Space: Roomy
bles in chapter 7. The facility has the tool required
Hirelings: 1
to craft the item, and the hireling has proficiency
Order: Craft
with that tool as well as proficiency in the Arcana
skill. See the “Crafting Magic Items” section in Icons ofyour religion are displayed in this facility,
chapter
7 for the time and money that must be which includes a quiet place for worship.
spent to craft the item. If the item allows its user Sanctuary Charm. After spendinga Long Rest
to cast any spells from it, you must craft the in your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see
item
yourself (the facility's hireling can assist), and you “Supernatural Gifts” in chapter 3) that lasts for 7
days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to
cast Healing Word once without expendina
g spell

slot. You can’t gain this Charm again while you still
have it. ScripToRIUM
Craft: Sacred Focus. When you issue the Craft Level 9 Bastion Facility
order to this facility, you commission the facility's
Prerequisite: None
hireling to craft a Druidic Focus (wooden staff) or
Space: Roomy
a Holy Symbol. The work takes 7 days and costs no
Hirelings: 1
money. The item remains in your Bastion until you
Order: Craft
claim it.
A Scriptorium contains desks and writing supplies.
Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to
Sancrum this facility, choose one of the following options:
Level 17 Bastion Facility
Craft: Book Replica. You commission the facility's
Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic hireling to make a copy of a nonmagical Book.
Focus as a Spellcasting Focus Doing so requires a blank book. The work takes
Space: Roomy 7 days.
Hirelin Craft: Spell Scroll. You commission the facility's
Order: Empower hireling to scribe a Spell Scroll containing one

A Sanctum is a place of solace and healing. Cleric or Wizard spell of level 3 or lower. The
‘Sanctum Charm. After spending a Long Rest in facility has the necessary Calligrapher’s Supplies,

your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see “Su- and the hireling meets all the prerequisites needed

pernatural Gifts” in chapter 3) that lasts for7 days to scribe the scroll. The “Crafting Equipment”
or until you use it. The Charm allows you to cast section in the Player's Handbook specifies the time
Heal once without expending a spell slot. You can't needed to scribe the scroll and the cost of the

gain this Charm again while you still have it. scroll, which you must pay.

Empower: Fortifying Rites. When you issue the Craft: Paperwork. You commission the facility's
Empower order to this facility, you inspire its hireling to create up to fifty copies of a broad-

hirelings to perform daily rites that benefit you sheet, a pamphlet, or another loose-leaf paper
or another character you name. The beneficiary product. The work takes 7 days and costs you 1 GP

doesn’t need to be in the Bastion when the rites are per copy. At no additional cost in time or money,
performed to gain their benefit. Each time the ben- the facility's hireling can distribute the paper-
eficiary finishes a Long Rest, they gain Temporary work to one or more locations within 50 miles of

Hit Points equal to your level. This effect lasts for your Bastion.

7 days.
Sanctum Recall. While the Sanctum exists, you
always have the Word of Recall spell prepared.
Whenever you cast Word of Recall, you can make
your Sanctum the destination of the spell instead
of another place you have previously designated. In
addition, one creature of your choice that arrives in
the Sanctum via this spell gains the benefit of a Heal
spell.

A Senipronium was O€5K5 AND.

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

T

animals are available for purchase—horses, ponies,
SmirHy and mules being the most common. The Mounts
Level 5 Bastion Facility and Other Animals table in the Player's Handbook
gives standard prices for various mounts. You bear
Prerequisite: None
the total cost of any purchases.
Space: Roomy
‘When you sell a mount from your Stable, the
Hirelings: 2
buyer pays you 20 percent more than the standard
Order: Craft
price; this profit increases to 50 percent when you
This Smithy contains a forge, an anvil, and other reach level 13 and 100 percent when you reach
tools needed to craft weapons, armor, and other level 17.
equipment. Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Sta-
Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to ble to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you
this facility, choose one of the following options: do so, the Stable is large enough to house six Large
animals.
Craft: Smith's Tools. The facility's hirelings craft
anything that can be made with Smith's Tools, us-
ing the rules in the Player's Handbook.
STOREHOUSE
Craft: Magic Item (Armament). If you are level 9+,
Level5 Bastion Facility
can you commission the facility's hirelings to craft
a Common or an Uncommon magic item chosen Prerequisite: None
by you from the Armaments tables in chapter 7. ‘Space: Roomy
‘The facility has the tool required to craft the item, Hirelings: 1
and the hirelings have proficiency with that tool Order: Trade
as well as proficiency in the Arcana skill. See the A Storehouse is a cool, dark space meant to contain
“Crafting Magic Items” section in chapter 7 for objects from the Trade Goods table in chapter 7 and
the time and money that must be spent to craft from chapter 6 of the Player’s Handbook.
the item, If the item allows its user to cast any Trade: Goods. When you issue the Trade order to
spells from it, you must craft the item yourself this facility, its hireling spends the next 7 days pro-
(the facility's hirelings can assist), and you must curing nonmagical items that have a total value of
have all those spells prepared every day you spend 500 GP or less and stores them in the Storehouse,
crafting the item. or the hireling uses those 7 days to sell goods in
the Storehouse. You bear the total cost of any pur-
chases, and the maximum value of the items pur-
STABLE chased increases to 2,000 GP when you reach level
Level 9 Bastion Facility
9 and 5,000 GP when you reach level 13.
Prerequisite: None When you sell goods from your Storehouse, the
‘Space: Roomy buyer pays you 10 percent more than the standard
Hirelings: 1 price; this profit increases to 20 percent when you
Order: Trade reach level 9, 50 percent when you reach level 13,
and 100 percent when you reach level 17.
A Bastion can have more than one Stable. Each Sta-
ble you add to your Bastion comes with one Riding
Horse or Camel and two Ponies or Mules; see the
‘TELEPORTATION CIRCLE
Player's Handbook or the Monster Manual for these
Level 9 Bastion Facility
creatures' stat blocks. The facility is big enough to
house three Large animals. Two Medium creatures Prerequisite: None

‘occupy the same amount of space as one Large Space: Roomy
creature there. The facility's hireling looks after Hirelings: 1

these creatures. Order: Recruit

After a Beast that can serve as a mount spends Inscribed on the floor of this room is a permanent
at least 14 days in this facility, all Wisdom (Animal teleportation circle created by the Teleportation Cir-
Handling) checks made with respect to it have cle spell.
Advantage. Recruit: Spellcaster. Each time you issue the Re-
Trade: Animals, When you issue the Trade order to cruit order to this facility, its hireling extends an
this facility, you commission the facility's hireling invitation to a Friendly NPC spelicaster. Roll any
to buy or sell one or more mounts at normal cost, die. If the number rolled is oda, the invitee declines
keeping the ones you buy in your Stable. The work the invitation, and you gain no benefit from having
takes 7 days, and the DM decides what types of issued the order. If the number rolled is even, the

CHAPTER 8|_BASTIONS 347

invitee accepts the invitation and arrives in your rehearsals end, a character can expend their The-
Bastion via your Teleportation Circle. ater die to roll it and add the number rolled to one
While you are in your Bastion, you can ask the D20 Test they make, immediately after rolling the
spellcaster to cast one Wizard spell of level 4 or 420. Ifa character hasn't expended their Theater
lower; if you are level 17+, the spell’s maximum level die before gaining another, their first die is lost.
increases to 8. The spellcaster is assumed to have
the spell prepared. If the spell has one or more Ma-
terial components that cost money, you must pay ‘TRAINING AREA
for them before the spell can be cast. Level 9 Bastion Facility
The spellcaster stays for 14 days or until they cast Prerequisite: None
a spell for you. The spelicaster won't defend your Space: Vast
Bastion and departs immediately if the Bastion is Hirelings: 4
attacked (see “Bastion Events" at the end ofthe Order: Empower
chapter).
‘A Bastion can have more than one Training Area.
‘A Training Area might be an open courtyard, a
‘THEATER gymnasium, a music or dance hall, or a cleverly
Level 9 Bastion Facility built gauntlet of traps and hazards. It might contain
inanimate targets (for weapon practice), padded
Prerequisite: None
mats, and other equipment. One of the facility's
Space: Vast
hirelings is an expert trainer; the others serve as
Hirelings: 4
training partners
Order: Empower
When a Training Area becomes part of your Bas-
‘The Theater contains a stage, a backstage area tion, choose one trainer from the Expert Trainers
where props and sets are kept, and a seating area table. On each Bastion turn, you can replace that
fora small audience. trainer with another one from the table.
Empower: Theatrical Event. When you issue the
Empower order to this facility, its hirelings be- EXPERT TRAINERS
gin work on a theatrical production or concert. Trainer Type Empower Effect
Rehearsals and other preparations take 14 days,
Battle Expert When you take damage from an at-
followed by at least 7 days of performances. The
tack made with an Unarmed Strike
performances can continue indefinitely until a new
‘ora weapon, you can take a Reac-
production gets underway.
You or another character can contribute to a pro- tion to reduce this damage by 1d4.
duction in the following ways: Skills Expert You gain proficiency in one of the
following skills of your choi c-

‘Composer/Writer. A character can compose music
robatics, Athletics, Performance,
or write a script for a concert or production that
Sleight of Hand, or Stealth.
hasn't started rehearsals yet. This effort takes
1 days Tools Expert You gain proficiency with one tool
Conductor/Director. A character who remains in ofyour choice.
the Bastion for the entirety of the production can
Unarmed When you hit with your Unarmed
serve as the concert’s conductor or the produc
‘Combat Expert Strike and deal damage, the attack
tion's director.
deals an extra 1d4 Bludgeoning
Performer. A character who remains in the Bastion
damage.
for the entirety of the rehearsal period can be
astar performer in one or more of the perfor- Weapon Expert Choose a kind of Simple or Martial
‘mances; one of the Theater's hirelings can serve as ‘weapon, such as Spear or Long-
an understudy for additional performances. bow. If you aren't proficient with
At the end ofa rehearsal period, each character the weapon, you gain proficiency
who contributed to the concert or production can with it. If you already have profi-
make a DC 15 Charisma (Performance) check. If ciency with the weapon, you can
more of these checks succeed than fail, you and use its mastery property.
any other character who contributed to the concert
Empower: Training. When you issue the Empower
or production each gain a Theater die, a d6. This
order to this facility, the facility’s hirelings conduct
die changes to a d8 when you reach level 13 and a
training exercises for the next 7 days. Any character
10 when you reach level 17. At any point after the

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

who trains here for at least 8 hours on each of those yours. You start with two lieutenants but can add
days gains a benefit at the end of the training pe- more, as described below. If your Bastion lacks
riod. The benefit depends on which trainer is pres- facilities to house your lieutenants, they secure
ent in the facility, as noted in the Expert Trainers accommodations in the inn or settlement closest to
table. The benefit lasts for 7 days. your Bastion. Lieutenants are hirelings, not Bastion
Defenders; however, if your Bastion is attacked (see
“Bastion Events” at the end of this chapter), each
TrorHy Room lieutenant housed in your Bastion reduces by 1 the
Level 9 Bastion Facility number of dice you roll to determine how many
Prerequisite: None Bastion Defenders are lost in the attack.
Space: Roomy ‘The War Room contains war memorabilia plus
Hirelings: 1 a large table surrounded by enough chairs for you
Order: Research and your lieutenants.
Recruit Options. When you issue the Recruit order
This room houses a collection of mementos, such
to this facility, choose one ofthe following optio:
as weapons from old battles, the mounted heads of
slain creatures, trinkets plucked from dungeons and Recruit: Lieutenant. You gain one new lieutenant,
ruins, and trophies passed down from ancestors. You can have up to ten lieutenants at any time.
Research Options. When you issue the Research Assign names and personalities to them as you

order to this facility, choose one of the following see fit.
options: Recruit: Soldiers. You commission one or more of
your lieutenants to assemble a small army. Each
Research: Lore. You commission the facility's hire-
lieutenant can muster one hundred Guards (see
ling to research a topic of your choice. The topic
the Monster Manual) in 7 days to fight for your
can be a legend, any kind of creature, or a famous
cause. Reduce that number to twenty if you want
object. The topic need not be directly related them to be mounted on Riding Horses (see the
to items on display in the room, as the trophies Monster Manual). It costs you 1 GP per day to feed
provide clues to research a wide variety of other
each guard and each horse in your army. Wher-
subjects. The work takes 7 days. When the re- ever the army goes, it must be led by you or at
search concludes, the hireling obtains up to three least one of your lieutenants, or else it disbands
accurate pieces of information about the topic
immediately. The army also disbands if it goes 1
that were previously unknown to you and shares day without being fed. Otherwise, the army re-
this knowledge with you the next time you speak mains until itis destroyed or you command it to
with them. The DM determines what information disband. You can't issue this Recruit order again
is learned.
until your current army disbands or is destroyed.
Research: Trinket Trophy. You commission the
facility’s hireling to search for a trinket that might
be of use to you. The work takes 7 days. When WorksHoP
the research concludes, roll any die. If the number Level 5 Bastion Facility
rolled is odd, the hireling finds nothing useful.
Prerequisite: None
If the number rolled is even, the hireling finds a
Space: Roomy
magic item. Roll on the Implements—Common
Hirelings: 3
table in chapter 7 to determine what it is.
Order: Craft

‘This Workshop is a creative space where useful
War Room items can be crafted.
Level 17 Bastion Facility Artisan’s Tools. The Workshop comes equipped
Prerequisite: Fighting Style feature or Unarmored with six different kinds of Artisan's Tools, chosen
Defense feature from the following list:
‘Space: Vast
Carpenter's Tools Painter's Tools
Hirelings: 2+ (see below)
Cobbler’s Tools Potter's Tools
Order: Recruit
Glassblower’s Tools Tinker's Tools
‘The War Room is where you plan military actions Jeweler's Tools Weaver's Tools
in consultation with an inner circle of loyal lieuten- Leatherworker’s Tools Woodcarver's Tools
ants, each one a battle-hardened Veteran Warrior Mason's Tools
(see the Monster Manual) whose alignment matches

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS
349

Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to BasTION Events
this facility, choose one of the following options:
vd100 Event
Craft: Adventuring Gear. The facility's hirelings 01-50 All ls Well
craft anything that can be made with the tools
S1-55 Attack
you chose when you added the Workshop to your
Bastion (see above), using the rules in the Player's 56-58 Criminal Hireling
Handbook. 59-63 Extraordinary Opportunity
Craft: Magic Item (Implement). If you are level 9,
64-72 Friendly Visitors
you can commission the facility's hirelings to craft
a. Common or an Uncommon magic item chosen 73-76 Guest
by you from the Implements tables in chapter 7. 77-19 Lost Hirelings
The facility has the tool required to craft the item,
80-83 Magical Discovery
and the hirelings have proficiency with that tool
as well as proficiency in the Arcana skill. See the 84-91 Refugees
“Crafting Magic Items” section in chapter 7 for 92-98 Request
for Aid
the time and money that must be spent to craft
99-00 Treasure
the item. If the item allows its user to cast any
spells from it, you must craft the item yourself
EvENT DESCRIPTIONS
(the facility's hirelings can assist), and you must,
have all those spells prepared every day you spend ‘The events from the Bastion Events table are
crafting the item. detailed here in alphabetical order.

Source of Inspiration. After spending an entire Aut Is Wet
Short Rest in your Workshop, you gain Heroic Nothing significant happens. Roll on the following
Inspiration. You can't gain this benefit again until table, fleshing out the details as you see fit.
you finish a Long Rest.
1d8 Details
Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Work-
shop to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you ‘Accident reports are way down.
do so, the Workshop gains two additional hirelings The leak in the roof has been fixed.
and three additional Artisan's Tools (chosen from
No vermin infestations to report.
the list above).
You-Know-Who lost their spectacles again.
BASTION EVENTS ‘One of your hirelings adopted a stray dog.
Immediately after a character issues the Maintain You received a lovely leter from a friend.
order to their Bastion, the DM rolls once on the Bas-
‘Some practical joker has been putting rotten
tion Events table to determine what event, if any,
eggs in people's boots.
befalls the Bastion before the next Bastion Turn. If
an event occurs, the DM reads the event aloud to 8 Someone thought they saw a ghost.
the player whose character controls that Bastion.
(All the events are described in the sections follow- ATTACK
ing the table.) The event is resolved immediately, A hostile force attacks your Bastion but is defeated
with the player and DM working together to expand Roll 6d6; for each die that rolls a 1, one Bastion
story details as needed. If multiple characters issue Defender dies. Remove these Bastion Defenders
the Maintain order on the same Bastion turn, roll from your Bastion’s roster: If the Bastion has zero
once on the table for each of them, resolving each Bastion Defenders, one of the Bastion’s special facil-
event separately even if the Bastions are combined. ities (determined randomly) is damaged and forced
Bastion events occur only when a Bastion is oper- to shut down.
ating under the Maintain order, which often means A special facility that shuts down can't be used on
that the Bastion’s owner isn't present in the Bastion your next Bastion turn, after which it is repaired
at the time. That means these events can be oppor- and made operational again at no cost to you.
tunities for the player to take on the role of the Bas-
CRIMINAL HIRELING
tion’s hirelings and roleplay their reactions to these
One of your Bastion’s hirelings has a criminal past
events. The DM can even turn a Bastion event into a
that comes to light when officials or bounty hunters
cutscene where each player takes on the role of one
of the Bastion’s hirelings (under the gi ince of the visit your Bastion with a warrant for the hireling’s
arrest. You can retain the hireling by paying a bribe
player whose character owns the Bastion).
of 1d6 « 100 GP. Otherwise, the hireling is arrested

35° CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

and taken away. If this loss leaves one of your fa- Guest
cilities without any hirelings, that facility can't be A Friendly guest comes to stay at your Bastion. De-
used on your next Bastion turn. The hireling is then termine the guest by rolling on the following table,
replaced at no cost to you. and work with your DM to flesh out the details.

EXTRAORDINARY OPPORTUNITY 1d4 Guest
Your Bastion is given the opportunity to host an 1 The guest is an individual of great renown who
important festival or celebration, fund the research stays for 7 days. At the end of their stay, the
ofa powerful spellcaster, or appease a domineering guest gives you a letter of recommendation
noble. Work with the DM to determine the details.
(See “Marks of Prestige” in chapter 3).
If you seize the opportunity, you must pay 500
GP to cover costs. In return, your Bastion gains a 2 The guest requests sanctuary while avoiding
sudden influx of recognition or attention, prompt- persecution for their beliefs or crimes. They
ing the DM to roll again on the Bastion Events table depart 7 days later, but not before offering you
(rerolling this result if it comes up again). a gift of 1d6 x 100 GP.
Ifyou decline the opportunity, you don't pay the SMa pictoamecny mnesleee

money and nothing elac: happens: ional Bastion Defender. The guest doesn’t
FRIENDLY VisITORS require a facility to house them, and they stay
Friendly visitors come to your Bastion, seeking to until you send them away or they're killed.
use one of your special facilities. They offer 1d6 « 4. The guestis a Friendly monster, such esa
100 GP for the brief use of that facility. For exam- brass dragon or a treant. Ifyour Bastion is
ple, a knight might want your Smithy to replace a attacked while this monster is your guest, it
horseshoe or repair a damaged weapon or suit of,
defends your Bastion, and you lose no Bastion
armor, or sages might need your Arcane Study to
Defenders. The monster leaves after it defends
help them settle a dispute. Their use of the facility
your Bastion once or when you send it away.
doesn't interrupt any orders you've issued to it.

CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS 35

« ai
1d100 Treasure
BASTION TRACKER
01-40 Roll on the 25 GP Art Objects table.
Players can use the Bastion Tracker sheet as a
record of the facilities and other characteristics of 41-63 Roll on the 250 GP Art Objects table.
their Bastions. Encourage your players to list their 64-73 Roll on the 750 GP Art Objects table.
hirelings on this sheet and develop them more
fully as NPCs on separate sheets (perhaps using
14-75 Roll on the 2,500 GP Art Objects table.
the NPC Tracker in chapter 3). Similarly, the Bas- 76-90 Roll on a Common Magic Items table of
tion Tracker provides space to indicate the space your choice (Arcana, Armaments, Imple-
of each special facility, but encourage players to ments, or Relics).
draw maps oftheir Bastions (see “Bastion Map”
91-98 Roll on an Uncommon Magic Items table
earlier in this chapter).
of your choice (Arcana, Armaments, Imple-
ments, or Relics).
Lost HirELINcs
One ofyour Bastion’s special facilities (determined 99-00 Roll on a Rare Magic Items table of your
randomly) loses its hirelings. The cause of their choice (Arcana, Armaments, Implements,
departure is up to you. The facility can’t be used or Relics).
on your next Bastion turn, but the hirelings are re-
placed at no cost to you at that point. FALL OF A BASTION
Macca Discovery A player character can lose their Bastion in the fol-

Your hirelings discover or accidentally create an lowing ways:

Uncommon magic item of your choice at no cost to estiture. A character can give up their Bastion
you. The magic item must be a Potion or Scroll. anytime, releasing the Bastion's hirelings and
abandoning the location. The divested Bastion is
REFUGEES
quickly vacated, is eventually looted, and might
A group of2d4 refugees fleeing from a monster
even be burned to the ground.
attack, a natural disaster, or some other calamity
Neglect. Ifa character issues no orders to their
seeks refuge in your Bastion. If your Bastion lacks
Bastion for a number of consecutive Bastion turns
a basic facility large enough to house them, the ref
equal to the character's level (typically because
‘ugees camp right outside the Bastion. The refugees
the character is dead or otherwise out of commis-
offer you 1d6 100 GP as payment for your hospi-
sion), the hirelings abandon the Bastion and the
tality and protection. They stay until you find them
site is eventually looted. If the character returns
anew home or a hostile force attacks your Bastion.
later, they can start a new Bastion, perhaps build-

REQUEST FOR AID ing it amid the ruins ofthe old one.

Your Bastion is called on to help a local leader. Ruination. Drawing the Ruin card from the Deck of
‘Many Things (as described in chapter 7) instantly
Perhaps there's a search on for a missing person,
deprives a character of their Bastion. When such
or brigands are plaguing the area. If you help, you
must dispatch one or more Bastion Defenders. Roll an event occurs, the player can decide what terri-

1d6 for each Bastion Defender you send. If the total ble fate befalls the Bastion. The Bastion might be
is 10 or higher, the problem is solved and you earn sacked by enemies or destroyed by an earthquake,
for example.
a reward of 1d6 « 100 GP. Ifthe total is less than 10,
the problem is still solved, but the reward is halved Regardless of how the Bastion falls, the player can
and one of your Bastion Defenders is killed. Remove work with the DM to establish a new Bastion and
that Bastion Defender from your Bastion’s roster. determine how it comes into being. Use the Special
Facility Acquisition table to determine how many
TREASURE
special facilities come with it. The new Bastion also
Your Bastion acquires an art object or a magic item
starts with two basic facilities (one Cramped and
determined by rolling on the table below and then
one Roomy) of the player's choice.
rolling on the specified table in chapter 7. How the
Bastion acquires this treasure is up to you. It might
represent an inheritance, a gift from a guest or an
admirer, a theft, or a fortunate discovery. If you're
in the Bastion, you can claim the treasure immedi-
ately; otherwise, it is placed in storage until you can
claim it.

352 CHAPTER 8 | BASTIONS

K BASTION TRACKER

BASTION’S NAME:

CHARACTER’S NAME: LEVEL:

BASIC FACILITIES

BASTION DEFENDERS:

SPECIAL FACILITY: SPECIAL FACILITY:

SPACE: SPACE:
ORDER: ORDER:
HIRELINGS: HIRELINGS:

NOTES NOTES

SPECIAL FACILITY: SPECIAL FACILITY:

SPACE: SPACE:
ORDER: ORDER:
HIRELINGS: HIRELINGS:

NOTES NOTES

SPECIAL FACILITY: SPECIAL FACILITY:

SPACE: SPACE:
ORDER: ORDER:
HIRELINGS: HIRELINGS:

Li NOTES NOTES

APPENDIX A

LORE GLOSSARY
This appendix provides brief descriptions for many and his eyes now glow with demonic flame. A secre-
of the D&D game's most famous heroes, villains, tive cult of Ashardalon’s followers and spawn serves
creatures, locations, and materials. (If something him on the Material Plane, furthering the dragon's
isn't listed here, check the index to see whether it's schemes to attain godhood.
covered elsewhere in the book.) The entries are pre-
sented in alphabetical order. Basa YAGA
Terms in bold have their own ent ss in this Baba Yaga (BAH-bah YAH-gah) is an arch-hag known
appendix. as the Mother of All Witches. She is also the
adoptive mother of Iggwilv. Baba Yaga is famous
ACERERAK for her chicken-legged hut, in which she travels
Acererak (ah-SAIR-er-rack) is a powerful lich who across the planes of the multiverse. This impatient,
travels between worlds and takes pleasure in de- foul-tempered hag is a font of knowledge about all
vouring the souls of adventurers, whom he lures things magical.
into trap-ridden dungeons to suffer horrible deaths.
The most famous of such dungeons is the Tomb of BAHAMUT
Horrors, hidden in the Vast Swamp in the Grey- Bahamut (ba-HA-mutt) is one of the primordial
hawk setting (see “Greyhawk Gazetteer” in chapter dragons who (along with Tiamat) is said to have
5); another lies under the lost city of Omu in the created the First World. For practical purposes, he
jungles of Chult in the Forgotten Realms setting is a god—ageless and immortal—who has dwelled in
(described in the adventure Tomb of Annihilation). Mount Celestia (see chapter 6) since the destruc-
tion of the First World. In the Dragonlance setting,
ADAMANTINE where he is called Paladine (PAL-a-deen), he is the
‘Adamantine is one of the hardest substances in exis- greatest of the gods of good. On other worlds, he
tence, a dark metal found in meteorites and extraor- is revered as a god of justice and nobility and is fa-
dinary mineral veins. (See the Adamantine Armor vored by Paladins.
and Adamantine Weapon magic items in chapter 7.)

ALUSTRIEL SILVERHAND
Alustriel (ah-LOOSE-tree-ell) Silverhand is the second
of seven daughters of Mystra, a deity of magic in
the Forgotten Realms setting. (Laeral Silverhand
is Alustriel’s younger sister.) She ruled the city of
Silverymoon for centuries but stepped down from
that position a little over a century ago to promote
goodness and compassion in the multiverse. She has
befriended adventurers such as Drizzt Do'Urden
and worked alongside the Harpers in pursuit of
these aims.

ASHARDALON
The terrible red dragon Ashardalon (ah-SHAR-duh-
lawn) is legendary across the multiverse for his
rampages, which turned lush grasslands into ashen
plains and caused mighty citadels to be swallowed
into the earth. As he grew aware of worlds be-
yond his home, he recruited a balor demon named
‘Ammet, the Eater of Souls, to help him extend his
reach and increase his power. When an adventurer
dealt a mortal blow to Ashardalon's heart, the
dragon replaced the injured organ with the balor.
Ashardalon's features then took on a fiendish cast,

APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY
354

To metallic dragons, Bahamut is more like a king CASTLE RAVENLOFT
than a god. Individual dragons might owe Bahamut
Castle Ravenloft (RAY-ven-loft)is the heart of the
allegiance, respect him, pay tribute to him, and
domain of Barovia and the home ofthe vampire
strive to emulate him, but they don’t worship him.
Strahd von Zarovich. Ravenloft is also one of the
most famous dungeon adventures in the history of
Bapur's GATE
the D&D game, providing a horror-themed expe-
‘The city of Baldur's Gate (BAWL-durz GATE), in the
rience that inspired the creation of the Ravenloft
Forgotten Realms setting, is a teeming metropolis
setting and the adventure Curse of Strahd.
haunted by the lingering influence of three evil gods
(Bane, Bhaal, and Myrkul) who refuse to stay dead. ComPaNions OF THE HALL, THE
It's a place where a sword for hire can find a rich pa- Named for the dwarf stronghold of Mithral Hall
tron, join a secret guild, pursue killers for a bounty, in the Forgotten Realms setting, the Companions
or aid desperate citizens. The city offers opportu- of the Hall is a group of heroic adventurers whose
nities for good-hearted champions to fight against exploits have spanned centuries and even crossed
corruption and bring murderers to justice, while the bounds of death. Drizzt Do'Urden is the central
less moral mercenaries find a good price for their figure in this party; all his companions have died
services. Baldur's Gate hosts the most reliable and and been reincarnated in new forms in recent years.
ruthless market on the Sword Coast. Information, These other companions are Drizat's wife, Cattie-
treasures, secrets, and souls can be bought or sold Brie; his adoptive father, Bruenor Battlehammer;
for the right price. and his friends Wulfgar and Regis.

BAROVIA CoMPANY OF SEVEN, THE
Barovia (buh-ROVE-ee-ah) is a Domain of Dread se- ‘The Company of Seven was a group of adventur-
questered in the Shadowfell (see chapter 6)—a sort ers active hundreds of years ago in the Greyhawk
of spiritual prison for Strahd von Zarovich in his setting, Its members included Heward, Keoghtom,
Castle Ravenloft. It’s also the name of a village in Murlynd, Nolzur, Qual, Tasha (see Iggwilv), and
that domain. Zagig (see Zagyg). Some of these adventurers
achieved near-divine status, and most of them are
BicBy remembered for magic items that carry the
Bigby (BIG-bee) is a former apprentice of Morden- ‘The group inspired the formation of the
kainen. Though he began his career determined to Eight (described in the “Greyhawk” section in chap-
use magic to dominate and control others, Bigby ter 5).
eventually changed his ways and has worked hard
to make amends for his past villainy. Mordenkainen CoRELLON
welcomed Bigby into the adventuring company At the dawn of the multiverse, Corellon (core-ELL-on
known as the Citadel of Eight (which later became ‘or CORE-eh-lawn) danced from world to world and
the Circle of Eight, described in chapter 5). Shy and plane to plane. A being of consummate mutability
soft-spoken, Bigby was often eclipsed by his mentor, and infinite grace, Corellon is a whimsical shape-
who taught Bigby how to control his ambitions, AF- shifter, able to take the form of
a chuckling stream,
ter years of adventuring, Bigby crafted a handful of a teasing breeze, an incandescent beam, a school
spells that gained him widespread renown. Ofthese of fish, or
a flock of birds. Corellon's flamboyant,
spells, Bigby’s Hand is his undisputed magnum opus. mercurial personality infuses every form the god
A recent misadventure led to Bigby’s untimely adopts. Corellon loves wholeheartedly and takes
demise. After he was crushed to death by a frost pleasure from every encounter with other divine
giant's boulder, Bigby was the target of a Reincarnate beings of the multiverse.
spell. The spell transformed Bigby from a human According to legend, the first elves emerged from
into a gnome. Before setting off on his next adven- Corellon’s shed blood, and they shared the god's
ture, Bigby was overheard saying how curious he changeable and audacious nature, Many elves, along
was to experience the multiverse from a gnome's with members of other species, worship Corellon.
perspective,
DELINA
Boo Delina (dell EEN-ah) is a young elf Sorcerer who
Boo is a hamster. More precisely, he is a miniature wields the unpredictable power of wild magic. Find-
giant space hamster, a species native to Wildspace ing herself in trouble in the city of Baldur's Gate,
(ee chapter 6) that is both sapient and telepathic. she accidentally reawakened the ancient hero of the
Boo's adventures with Minsc, as well as the ham- city, Minse, and got thrown into further adventures
ster's ferocity, have given Boo legendary status, par- pursuing her lost twin brother,
ticularly in the city of Baldur's Gate.

APPENDIX A| LORE GLOSSARY 355

DIANCASTRA After befriending a princess named Asteria and
Diancastra (DIE-ann-CAST-rah) is a demigod and a spending many years in her dear friend’s company,
daughter of the divine ancestor of giants, Annam. Euryale was captured and sentenced to death by As-
She is a trickster, an adventurer, and a scholar of teria's father. Asteria pleaded with the gods to save
magic who enjoys wandering the Material Plane in her friend, and Istus (a god from the Greyhawk set-
search of new curiosities and spells to learn. She ting; see chapter 5) intervened to help the pair re-
longs to see the descendants of Annam—storm, write their story, creating the Deck of Many Things.
cloud, fire, frost, stone, and hill giants—restored to ‘The magic of the deck helped the two escape, and
the position of honor and respect they held in an- they adventured together across the multiverse.
nt times. Eventually, Euryale—having become an ancient,
wise, and powerful Druid—settled in the Outlands
Drizzt Do'URDEN (see chapter 6), where she still sometimes acts as a
Drizat Do'Urden (DRIZT doh-UR-den) is a drow exile patron, mentor, or ally for adventurers.
from the city of Menzoberranzan and a fugitive
from the wrath of Lolth (see chapter 6) and her FALLBACKS, THE
priests. He wandered the surface world and gath- ‘Tessalynde is a young elf Rogue who dreams of
ered a circle of friends who became known as the leading the foremost adventuring party of the For-
Companions of the Hall. gotten Realms setting. While the crew she’s gath-
ered isn't the stuff oflegend yet, she's confident her
Eber Eviis guidance can get them there. Called the Fallbacks,
The Elder Evils are a variety of entities whose exis- the team includes Anson, a human Fighter too stub-
tence dates to the beginnings of the multiverse—or born to stay down; Cazrin, a self-taught, human
possibly predates it. Some Elder Evils are creatures Wizard determined to test her theoretical mettle
of the Far Realm (see chapter 6), while others are against the real world; Baldric, a dwarf Cleric who
akin to gods or primordial beings of the Elemental refuses to tie himself to a single deity when he can
Planes. Some are thought to be imprisoned, while trade favors with them all; Lark, a tiefling Bard with
others are said to be slumbering until they awaken as many secrets as songs; and Uggie, a pet otyugh.
in some apocalyptic cataclysm.
‘The names given to these terrible entities include First Wort, THE
such strange descriptions as Atropus, the World Scholars speak of a primordial state, a single real-
Born Dead; Dendar, the Night Serpent; Hadar, ity they call the First World, which preceded the
the Dark Hunger; Haemnathuun, the Blood Lord; Material Plane. Many of the peoples and monsters
Ityak-Ortheel, the Elf-Eater; Kezef, the Chaos that inhabit the worlds on the Material Plane origi-
Hound; Kyuss, the Worm That Walks; the Queen of nated there. After the First World was shattered by
Chaos; Tharizdun, the Chained God; Tyranthraxus, a great cataclysm—giving birth to the worlds that
the Flamed One; and Zargon, the Returner. They came in its wake—the progeny of the first elves,
are all forces of corruption and evil. Nothing good dwarves, beholders, and other iconic creatures took
can come from their influence. Bargains made with root on world after world, like seeds scattered by
them end in catastrophe or death. a cosmic wind. If the musings of these great sages
are true, every world of the Material Plane is a
ELMINSTER reflection—or, in some cases, a distortion—of the
Elminster (el-MIN-ster) is a powerful and ancient First World.
archmage in the Forgotten Realms setting. As one
of Mystra's Chosen, divinely called and empowered FIzBAN
by the deity of magic, Elminster fosters magic and In the Dragonlance setting, Bahamut—who is,
protects the fabric of magic in the world. Though known there as Paladine—dwelled among mortals,
this responsibility demands a certain amount of in human guise for a time, aiding the forces of good
neutrality and dispassionate judgment, Elminster against Takhisis (see Tiamat). He appeared as a
has a fundamentally kind and compassionate heart. bumbling old mage named Fizban (FIZZ-ban) the
Fabulous.
EURYALE
One card in the Deck of Many Things (see chapter 7) Great Mopron Marcu, THE
bears a person’s proper name, and the card's name- When the gears of the plane of Mechanus (see chap-
sake, Euryale (YUR-ee-ale or yur-EYE-a-lee),is the ter 6) complete seventeen cycles—once every 289
subject of much speculation. Often assumed to be a years—the modron (MOE-dron) leader, Primus, sends
fearsome demigod (perhaps the first medusa) or the a vast army of modrons across the Outer Planes.
wielder ofa destructive curse, Euryale is actually a ‘The purpose of this march is unclear, Most believe
key part of the story of the magical deck’s creation. it to be a data-gathering mission meant to ascertain

356 APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY

Tus Gacar

Moonon March

the current state of the cosmos, but some see it as members pride themselves on their ingenuity and
reconnaissance aimed at some future act of con- incorruptibility. Harpers don’t seek power or glory,
quest. The march is long and dangerous, and only a only fair treatment for all.
small number of modrons returns to Mechanus.
HEROES OF THE LANCE, THE
GruuMsH The adventurers known as the Heroes ofthe Lance,
Gruumsh (GROOMSH) is a warring god who is often whose deeds helped prevent Takhisis (see Tiamat)
described as the creator or patron of the ore people. and her evil dragons from conquering the world
Some orcs attribute their tenacity and toughness of the Dragonlance setting, began as a small group
to Gruumsh’s lingering influence. Some myths de- of young adventurers and their aging dwarf men-
scribe a primeval conflict between Gruumsh and tor: This original group (known as the Innfellows)
Corellon, which resulted in Gruumsh losing one eye consisted of Tanis Half-Elven, the brothers Raistlin
and Corellon’s spilled blood becoming the first elves. and Caramon Majere, Sturm Brightblade, a kender
(similar to a halfling) named Tasslehoff Burrfoot,
Hapar the dwarf Flint Fireforge, and Kitiara Uth Matar,
Hadar (HAY-dar or ha-DARR), the Dark Hunger, is Raistlin and Caramon’s older half-sister. While Kiti
an ancient stellar entity originating from the Far ara eventually joined Takhisis’s service, the heroes
Realm (see chapter 6). It appears as a cinder-red were joined by others: Riverwind and Goldmoon,
dying star, barely visible in the night sky, and it si- from the nomadic peoples of the plains; Gilthanas
phons life from its minions to avert its own demise. and Laurana, elffriends from Tanis's childhood; and
‘Two widely used Warlock spells invoke Hadar's Tika Waylan, a young barmaid whom the original
power (see the Arms of Hadar and Hunger of Hadar Innfellows remembered as just a kid.
spells in the Player's Handbook), and a few Warlocks
claim this Elder Evil as their Great Old One patron. Heroes OF THE REALM, THE
‘The so-called “heroes of the Realm” are a group
Harpers, THE of young adventurers—Bobby, Diana, Eric, Hank,
‘The Harpers is a scattered network of spelleasters Presto, and Sheila—who traveled from Earth in the
and spies in the Forgotten Realms setting. Its mem- 1980s into a world in the D&D multiverse. Equipped
bers advocate equality and covertly oppose the with powerful magic items, they foiled the schemes
abuse of power, magical or otherwise. of foes such as Venger and Tiamat while seeking
‘The Harpers has risen, been shattered, and some means to return home. Eventually, as the he-
risen again several times. The faction’s longevity roes’ mastery of adventuring skills increased, they
and resilience are largely due to its decentralized, discovered the secrets of traveling between worlds,
grassroots, secretive nature and the autonomy of though they still haven't found a way home.
its members. It has small cells and lone operatives ‘The heroes of the Realm weren't the only kids
throughout the Forgotten Realms, although they transported from Earth to the worlds of D&D.
interact and share information with one another as Other young adventurers, including Niko the Cleric,
the need arises. The Harpers’ ideology is noble, and are still exploring the vast D&D multiverse.

APPENDIX A| LORE GLOSSARY 357

Icewinp DALE Kas THE BETRAYER
Icewind Dale is the northernmost settled region of Kas (KOSS) is a vampire, legendary swordfighter,
the Forgotten Realms setting, Freezing wind sweeps and ruthless warlord. He once served as the leader
across the tundra, finding its way through every of Vecna’s armies and the lich’s most trusted lieu-
crack and draining any hint of warmth. Between tenant, and he wielded a sword made for him (the
the ice cliffs of the eastern glacier, the snowcapped Sword of Kas, described in chapter 7) by his liege.
peaks ofthe mountains to the south, and the Sea of But the evil sword convinced Kas to betray Vecna,
Moving Ice to the north and west, ten small towns and now Kas is driven primarily by his hatred for
cluster around three icy lakes. his former lord.

Icownv KERaptis
Before she changed her name and conquered According to legend, Keraptis (kuh-RAP-tiss) was an
enough of Eastern Oerik (the Greyhawk setting) evil archmage who long ago seized power as a petty
to rightfully call herself the Witch Queen of Per- tyrant somewhere in the northern mount:
renland, Iggwilv (IGG-wily) was known as Tasha, a the Greyhawk setting. When his demands on the
human mage who began her career as the appren- local populace became too extreme, a revolt drove
tice of Zagig Yragerne (see Zagyg). Later, as an ing. He disappeared into the tunnels
adventurer, she created several new spells, includ- beneath White Plume Mountain (see “Greyhawk’s
ing Tasha’s Hideous Laughter and Tasha’s Bubbling Premise” in chapter 5). It’s conceivable that he
Cauldron, leaning on the teachings of her adoptive became a lich as the grim climax of his magical
mother, the arch-hag Baba Yaga. As Tasha grew in research,
power and made powerful enemies, she changed
her name to Iggwilv. In this guise, she became
enchanted with the power ofthe Abyss and wrote
the definitive treatise on demonkind: the Demonom-
icon of Iggwilv (see chapter 7). She also bound and
trapped the demon lord Graz’zt (see chapter 6).
Iggwilv ruled Perrenland as a tyrant. When
Graz’2t escaped his magical prison, Iggwilv went
into hiding. Iggwilv’s current location is unknown,
but she left behind a cambion son (Iuz), who
has his mother’s tyrannical bent, and a
daughter (Drelnza), who is now a vam-
pire and lairs in the Lost Caverns of
‘Tsojcanth (see “Greyhawk Gazetteer” in
chapter 5), not far from her mother's old
haunts,

luz
luz (EYE-o0ze or eye-OOZE) is a cambion and
the son of Iggwilv and Graz'zt (see chapter 6).
He is every bit as evil as his father and as bent
on conquest as his mother at her very worst. He
rules a significant portion of Eastern Oerik (in the
Greyhawk setting), and some fear that he aspires
to conquer even more territory. See “Greyhawk's
Premise" in chapter 5.

JALLARZI SALLAVARIAN
The youngest and most recently appointed member
of the Circle of Eight (see chapter 5), Jallarzi Salla-
varian (jut-LAR-zee sal-ah-VAIR-ee-en) is a Warlock
with a celestial patron. She is more inclined toward
good than the more neutral members of the Circle
of Eight and enjoys wandering the Free City of
Greyhawk (see chapter 5) in disguise, monitoring
inister elements of society there.

358 APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY

Kyuss
Variously identified as an Elder Evil, as a demigod,
or as a mortal priest of the demon lord Orcus (see
chapter 6), Kyuss (KYE-uss) is a mysterious figure
best known as the Worm That Walks. Kyuss man-
iflests on the Material Plane as a colossal mass of
maggots and worms animated by a single evil wil.

LAERAL SILVERHAND
Laeral (LAIR-ull)Silverhand is the fifth of seven
daughters of Mystra, a deity of magic in the Forgot-
ten Realms setting. (Alustriel Silverhand is Laeral’s
older sister) She is over 700 years old, and after
a period ofwithdrawal from public life, she now
serves as the Open Lord of Waterdeep-the only
one of the twenty or so Lords of Waterdeep whose
identity is publicly known. Though her power has
waxed and waned depending on Mystra's involve-
ment with the world and has declined significantly
in recent years, Laeral remains one ofthe most for-
midable spellcasters in a world known for powerful
spelicasters.

LEaGuE OF MALEVOLENGE, THE
‘The League of Malevolence is an odious assemblage
of villains united in one purpose: the accumulation
of power. Its founding member, Kelek the Sorcerer,
expects his confederates to work together for their
mutual benefit, but he also encourages them to pur-
sue their own evil schemes. Other members include Mins
the remorseless killer for hire Warduke, the assas- Minsc (MINSK) is a heroic Ranger from the land of
sin Zarak, and the evil Zargash, a servant of Orcus. Rashemen in the Forgotten Realms setting. Known
Skylla, a Warlock whose power derives from a pact for his good cheer, his hearty optimism, and his pet
with Baba Yaga, maintains a tenuous alliance with miniature giant space hamster, Boo, Minsc is partic-
the league but despises Kelek. ularly adored in the city of Baldur’s Gate.

Lorp SoTH MITHRAL
Lord Soth is a death knight in the Dragonlance Mithral (MITH-ral) is a light, flexible metal that re-
setting—a former Paladin who allowed his pride to sembles silver but is much more durable. Its most
lead him into evil. Offered an opportunity to re- common use is for crafting lightweight armor that
deem himself
by avertinga cataclysmic event, his provides excellent protection without bulk or bur-
pride again led him to abandon his quest and allow den (see the Mithral Armor magic item in chapter 7).
the devastation of his world. His mortal life ended
in that cataclysm, but he rose from the ashes into Morapin
undeath and retreated to his cursed castle, Dar- Myths told on many worlds describe Mora
gaard Keep. He ignored the outside world for many (MORE-ah-din) crafting all the peoples of the Mat
centuries until the Dragon Queen Takhisis (see rial Plane in his great workshop in Mount Celestia
Tiamat) called him forth to serve her in the War of (see chapter 6), causing them to spring to life from
the Lance. inert metal when he cooled the heated castings with
his breath. These myths are the source of Mora-
MENZOBERRANZAN din's appellation, “All-Father:” Many peoples across
‘The Underdark city of Menzoberranzan (men-zoh- the multiverse, including many dwarves, worship
buh-RAN-zan), lying far beneath the Sword Coast Moradin.
region of the Forgotten Realms, is ruled by tyran-
nical priests of the Demon Queen of Spiders, Lolth MorDENKAINEN
(see chapter 6). Most of its people are drow, whose Mordenkainen (mor-den-KIGH-nen or mor-den-
noble houses are locked in a constant struggle for KAY-nen) is a human archmage who maintains
Lolth’s favor and the power that comes with it. a residence in the Free City of Greyhawk and

APPENDIX A| LORE GLOSSARY 359

another hidden somewhere in the Yatil Mountains farmers, woodcutters, fur traders, and prospectors
between Perrenland and Ket (see chapter 5). He drawn by stories of gold and platinum in the foot-
is the founder and leader ofthe Circle of Eight, hills of the Sword Mountains—as well as more than
which he created to implement his philosophy of a few ruffians and bandits.
balance in the world. Among Mordenkainen’s cele-
brated accomplishments are several name-branded PRINCE OF Frost, THE
spells, including ones that create extradimensional ‘The Prince of Frost is a son of Titania, the Summer
mansions, swords of spectral force, and phantom Queen. He was once known as the Sun Prince, but
watchdogs (detailed in the Player’s Handbook). his heart grew cold when he was spurned by the fey
Mordenkainen has visited numerous worlds and noble he loved. He is now a creature of wrath and
planes of existence, making friends and fomenting winter, ruling from his Fortress of Frozen Tears in
rivalries on many of them, He maintains a close the Vale of Long Night in the Feywild (see chapter
friendship with his former apprentice Bigby and 6). He detests mortals of the Material Plane and
the famous archmage Elminster of Shadowdale. dreams of covering their many worlds with perpet-
Mordenkainen’s greatest rival is Iggwily, a former ual winter.
adventuring companion,
QUEEN OF Arr AND DARKNESS, THE
NEVERWINTER The mysterious Queen of Air and Darkness is the
‘Once known in the Forgotten Realms setting as archfey ruler
of the Gloaming Court in the Feywild
the Jewel of the North, the city of Neverwinter was (see chapter 6). Though she is often described as
badly damaged when a nearby volcano erupted malicious and evil, her motivations are as obscure
about fifty years ago, Now, its people work furiously and whimsical as any other archfey’s. She gives
to rebuild. Some of its outer walls still lie in ruins, supernatural bons and terrible curses with equal
and several ofits neighborhoods remain abandoned. whimsy, with little regard for the elaborate customs
Dagult Neverember is the Lord Protector of Nev- surrounding gifts and favors in other courts of the
erwinter, ruling in the absence of
a true heir to the Feywild. Though she is said to have a spectral form
crown. His dream is to see Neverwinter eclipse resembling a terrifying elf, to the unaided eye she
nearby Waterdeep in wealth and prosperity. appears as a strange, black diamond, hovering in the
air like the slitted pupil of an unseen cat.
OriLuKe
Otiluke (AW-teh-luke) is an impulsive, aggressive
Wizard who is the main agent of the Circle of Eight
in the Free City of Greyhawk (see chapter 5). He
holds a position ofpolitical power and keeps his
membership in the Circle of Bight secret. He is best
known for his spells that create magical spheres (de-
tailed in the Player’s Handbook).

Otto
Otto (AW-toe) is an affable dwarf Bard with a taste
for fine food, good music, and expensively tailored
clothes. His sociable and outgoing personality
masks the fact that he's also a member of the Circle
of Eight (see chapter 5) and committed to the goals
of that organization. He is well-known across the
multiverse for his creation of the Otto's Irresistible
Dance spell.

PHANDALIN
The frontier town of Phandalin (FAN-dub-lin or fan-
DAY-lin) in the Sword Coast region of the Forgotten
Realms setting is built on the ruins ofa much older
settlement. Hundreds of years ago, old Phandalin
was a thriving town until it was sacked by bandits
and lay abandoned for centuries.
In the past few years, hardy folk from the cities of
Neverwinter and Waterdeep have begun settling
atop the ruins of old Phandalin. It’s now home to

Tue Prince oF
360 APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY

Bral is populated by an outlandish collection of
traders, scoundrels, mercenaries, pirates, nobles,
and entrepreneurs. Generally, law enforcement is
sporadic, which means that order is elusive. Most
Tue Raven Queen
folks who call the Rock home adhere to two prin-
ciples: mind your own business whenever possible,
and enough gold can fix anything.

RUDOLPH VAN RICHTEN
A scholar and monster hunter, Rudolph van Richten
has traveled to dozens of Domains of Dread in the
Shadowfell (see chapter 6), investigating reports of
monstrous beings and documenting them in a series
of published guides, the best known of which is Van
Richten’s Guide to Vampires.
In kinder days, Rudolph lived with his wife, In-
grid, and son, Erasmus, but he lost them both to a
icked vampire. In the process of hunting the vam-
pire, Rudolph came under a terrible curse: “Live you
always among monsters, and see everyone you love
die beneath their claws.”
In the decades since, van Richten has hunted mon-
sters and armed others with the knowledge they
need to confront evil. Though he’s made many de-
voted allies, he keeps them at arm’s length, fearing
the threat of his curse.
Van Richten is closely associated with other he-
roes who prow! the Domains of Dread, including
the detective Alanik Ray and his partner Arthur
Sedgwick, the explorer Ez d’Avenir, and the twins
Gennifer and Laurie Weathermay-Foxgrove.
RAVEN QUEEN, THE
The Raven Queen is a being of mystery. Those who STRAHD VON ZAROVICH
claim to have encountered her have described an A brilliant thinker and capable warrior in life,
array of disturbing images: a terrible shadow that Strahd von Zarovich (STRAWD von zuh-ROH-vitch
clawed at their innermost thoughts, a pale and regal or ZAR-oh-vitch) fought in countless battles for his

elf who exploded into an untold number of ravens, a people. After a long life of warfare and slaughter,

shambling tangle of slick roots and sticks that over- he settled in the remote valley of Barovia and built
whelmed them with dread, or an unknown presence a castle on a towering pinnacle. His brother Sergei
that pulled them screaming into the gloom. came to live with him in Castle Ravenloft, becom-
Despite all attempts to demystify her, the Raven ing Strahd’s adviser and constant companion.
Queen has remained enigmatic and aloof. She rules Inhis brother, Strahd saw everything he was not.
Resentment colored their relationship and eventu-
from her Raven Throne within the Fortress of
Memories, a mazelike castle deep within the bleak- ally turned into hatred, Strahd’s beloved, Tatyana,
ness of the Shadowfell (see chapter 6). From there spurned Strahd for Sergei, whom she pledged
she sends out her raven servants to find interesting to marry.

souls she can pluck from the planes of existence. Ina desperate attempt to regain Tatyana’s love,
Once these souls are in the Shadowfell, she watches Strahd forged a pact with dark powers that made
as they attempt to unravel the mystery of their him immortal. Strahd confronted his brother at Ser-
being. gei and Tatyana’s wedding and killed him. Tatyana
fled and flung herself from Ravenloft’s walls. Guards
Rock oF BRAL, THE shot Strahd with arrows, but he didn't die, He be-
Bral is a city built on an asteroid that drifts through came a vampire—the first vampire, according to
Wildspace (see chapter 6). Its inhabitants, who hail many sages.

from many worlds across the Material Plane, typ- In the centuries since his transformation, Strahd’s
ically refer to Bral as the Rock. There is no other lust for life has grown. He broods in his castle, curs-
place quite like it in Wildspace—a teeming hive of ing the living for all he has lost and never admitting
business that spans the breadth of the Astral Sea. to his role in the tragedy.

APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY 361

THARIZDUN
For a being known as the Chained God, the Elder
Evil Tharizdun (thuh-RIZZ-dun or thair-izz-DOON)
has managed to extend his baleful influence from
the Greyhawk setting through many worlds of the
Material Plane. He is an ancient force of entropy,
the end ofall things and the extinction of life. His
worshipers are nihilists who seek to end all worlds
by liberating their god. Tharizdun is often linked to
cults of Elemental Evil (see chapter 5).

Tiamat
Tiamat (TEE-a-mat) is one of the primordial dragons
who (along with Bahamut) is said to have created
the First World. Since the destruction of the First
World, she has made her home in the Nine Hells (see
chapter 6), where she is served by devils and enjoys
the worship of mortals across the multiverse. In the
Dragonlance setting, where she is known as Takhi-
sis (ta-KEE-sis), she is the greatest of the gods of evil.
On many worlds, she is known as a god of greed,
‘wealth, and vengeance,
Chromatic dragons might fear, respect, envy, and
appease Tiamat as a sovereign, but they don’t wor-
ship her. Their devotion to her rarely supersedes
their devotion to their own goals.

UNDERDARK, THE
‘Tue Summen Queen
The Underdark is a vast subterranean realm of nat-
ural caverns and passages extending far beneath
the surface of most D&D worlds. Many creatures
inhabit the Underdark, including drow, duergar,
SUMMER QUEEN, THE svirfneblin, and other species that have adapted to

Titania, the Summer Queen, is the regal and char- the world below the surface.

ismatic ruler of the Summer Court in the Feywild
UNDERMOUNTAIN
(see chapter 6). Perhaps the mightiest of the arch-
Undermountain is the largest, deepest dungeon in
fey, she can ripen a crop with a smile and summon
the Forgotten Realms setting. It’s a series ofinter-
wildfires with the merest crinkling of her brow.
connected dungeon levels sprawling far beneath
Sworp Coast, THE the city of Waterdeep. Its tunnels connect to pre-
‘The Sword Coast is the western edge of the conti- existing mithral mines and natural caverns of the
nent of the Forgotten Realms setting, running along Underdark. The best-known entrance to Under-
the Sea of Swords. It’s a narrow band of territory mountain is through the Yawning Portal tavern in

dominated by several major city-states, from Nev- Waterdeep, but other routes also exist. A reclusive
erwinter in the north to Baldur's Gate in the south, and cantankerous archmage named Halaster Black-

with Waterdeep in between, cloak claims Undermountain as his domain, al-
though his overlordship isn't widely acknowledged
Szass TAM by the dungeon's other denizens.
Szass ‘Tam (ZASS TAM) is a powerful lich and necro-
mancer in the Forgotten Realms setting. As leader VaJRA SAFAHR
ofthe Red Wizards of Thay, he has countless spies, Vajra Safahr (VAWJ-rah sah-FAR) is a human Wiz-

assassins, and other agents at his service, and his ard in her midthirties, making her the youngest
schemes span centuries and reach to the ends of person ever to hold the position of Blackstaff—the
the world. chief mage of Waterdeep and the head of Blackstaff
Academy, a school for mages. Several of the older
and more seasoned mages of Waterdeep consider
Vajra an upstart, but they are smart enough not to

362 APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY

him as a bootblack and scribe. He studied magic in
secret until he amassed enough power to slaughter
the order, and then he turned his efforts toward
scribing the Book of Vile Darkness (described in
chapter 7). Armed with that dread tome, he forged
a kingdom to rule, with the vampire Kas as his
lieutenant, But Kas betrayed and killed him, leaving
only one hand and one eye intact (the Eye and Hand
of Vecna are described in chapter 7).
Vecna’s evil will was so great that he persisted
beyond death and eventually became a demigod of
secrets and evil magic. His ambition drives him to
pursue greater divine power across the multiverse.

VENGER
‘Venger (VEN-jur) was once both human and good-
hearted, but some fiendish force transformed him
into a winged, one-horned villain. His schemes have
spanned centuries and worlds, as he seeks to seize
ever-increasing magical power. He has a particular
loathing for Tiamat and longs to overthrow her. He
is often seen astride a flying black steed, his shad-
owy adviser in tow.

vi
Vi (VYE) is a gnome artificer, entrepreneur, and
traveler of many worlds who originally hails from
Eberron. After helping to create terribly destructive
weapons during the Last War, Vi sought to atone
for this guilt by establishing the Fixers, an organiza~
tion dedicated to solving apparently hopeless prob-
lems, From the Fixers’ headquarters in Sigil, Vi has
brought her genius, warm heart, and love for a stiff
challenge her. As the badge of her office, she carries drink to many worlds across the multiverse.
the Blackstaff, an Artifact that holds the spirits of all
VLAAKITH
her predecessors.
Vlaakith (VLAH-kith) is the lich-queen of the
Varor’s CALL githyanki city of Tu'narath, adrift in the Astral
The noble adventuring party known as Valor’s Call Plane (see chapter 6). She is ancient, having fought
was founded by Strongheart, a resolute human Pal- alongside a leader named Gith to win her people's
adin committed to destroying
evilwherever it rears freedom from the mind flayers that enslaved them.
its head. Strongheart alone determines who can Githyanki of Tu’narath swear unquestioning obe-
become a member of this prestigious group, and he dience to the lich-queen, and she promises access
is always looking for courageous heroes willing to to paradise to those who serve her loyally. In truth,
devote themselves to a good cause. she feasts on the souls of any subjects who grow
Only good-aligned characters can join Valor’s powerful enough to dream of challenging her.
Call. The group enjoys the patronage of Yolande,
WATERDEEP
the queen ofCelene, and carries out missions on her
Waterdeep is the most famous and cosmopolitan
behalf both in the Greyhawk setting (see chapter 5)
city in the Forgotten Realms setting. It’s a center of
and in the Feywild (see chapter 6).
Prominent members of Valor’s Call include the wealth and influence where people come to make
dwarf Fighter Elkhorn, the human Cleric Mercion, their dreams come true. The city is home to the
the human Rogue Molliver, and the human Wizard Yawning Portal, the best-known point of access to
Ringlerun. the sprawling dungeon of Undermountain.

VECNA XANATHAR
Xanathar (ZAN-a-thar) is an eccentric beholder
Vecna (VECK-nah) had humble beginnings in the
Greyhawk setting, where an order of Wizards used crime lord dwelling beneath Waterdeep. Desiring to

APPENDIX A| LORE GLOSSARY 363

know all there is to know, Xanathar collects knowl-
edge from across the multiverse, but its most prized
possession is its goldfish, Sylgar.

YAWNING PorTAL, THE
‘The Yawning Portal is a tavern in Waterdeep, built
around an entrance to the infamous dungeon of Un-
dermountain. Adventurers throughout the Forgot-
ten Realms setting and elsewhere in the multiverse
visit the Yawning Portal to exchange knowledge
about Undermountain and other dungeons. Most
visitors are content to swap stories by the hearth,
but some adventurers pay the toll for entry into
Undermountain (collected by the mysterious owner
and bartender, Durnan).

YOLANDE
Yolande (yoh-LAWND), known as the Faerie Queen,
is the benevolent and beloved elf monarch of Celene
(see chapter 5). Raised in the court of the Summer
Queen, Yolande had no wish to rule. She preferred
the life of an adventuring magic-user. She built her
reputation on triumphs, such as her capture of the
fomorian brigand Solgna and the theft ofthe Prince
of Frost's sentient sword, Winterflash. Yolande was
among the first elves to migrate from the Feywild to
the Greyhawk setting.

Zacyo
‘The archmage Zagig Yragerne (ZAG-igg EE-rag-airn)
was an adventurer in the Greyhawk setting and a
member of the Company of Seven. At the climax of
a long and prosperous adventuring career, he built
a fortress known as Castle Greyhawk outside the
Free City of Greyhawk (see chapter 5). From this
stronghold, he took an increasingly powerful role
in the politics of the city, contributing to its repu-
tation as “the Gem of the Flanaess.” He obsessively
delved deeper under his castle and withdrew from
the outside world until he managed to entrap nine
demigods in magical prisons and claim a fragment
of their divine power. He ascended to a minor form
of godhood, took the name Zagyg, and took a place
in the court of Boccob, a god of magic.

ZARGON
Zargon (ZAR-gawn) is an Elder Evil—an undying
abomination from eons past with an insatiable
appetite. A tentacled, slime-covered horror with a
cyclopic red eye and an indestructible horn, Zargon
corrupts creatures it doesn't devour, transforming
its victims into amorphous servants. Zargon is im-
prisoned on the Material Plane in a prison deep in
the earth. This prison is described in the Quests from
the Infinite Staircase adventure anthology.

364 APPENDIX A | LORE GLOSSARY

APPENDIX B

Ha,, Maps

1 Square = 5 Feet

j; UptoLevel

Barnow Cavor

APPENDIX D | MAPS 365

366 APPENDIX B | Mars

Aeisquare
act Li

25

APPENDIX B | MAPS 367

1 Square = 5 Feet

Dracon's Lain

368 APPENDIX B | ars

) \ | Surface Level
AS

1 Square = 5 Feet

Donceow Hiosour

APPENDIX B| MAPS — 369

370 APPENDIX B | MAPS

APPENDIX B| MAPS 371

a

ey
a3
oO
|_!O]|

< 4
Sy “. -
oe e
= ete
372 APPENDIX B| MA
PS

Mine

APPENDIX B| MAPS 373

|i

1 Square = 5 Feet

GroundFloor i, ¢

Ronosioe INN

374 APPENDIX B| MAPS

|
es
|
| |
a ee ee ee Se ee Se eee ee es

APPENDIX B| MAPS 375

1 Square = 5 Feet

Seoony House

376 APPENDIX B | MAPS

1 Square = 5 Feet

Unoenoane Wanaen

APPENDIX B| MAPS 377

1 Square: = 5Feet +
¥

Voucanie Caves

378 2 é5 %

|

|

|

1 Square 5 Feet

\_|_Dungeons

|
I

Werano’s Tower

APPENDIX B | MAPS 379

——

INDEX
‘Aaga, 188, altitude, high, 69 attitude, 32 Bighy, 146, 355
Abellio, 183, Alustrie Silveshand, 354 ‘and alignment, 51 Black Dragon inn, 152
Abilities, Ability Checks, Ammunition, +1, +2, or initial, 16 Blackrazor, 236
‘and Saving Throws $3,228 attunement, 217 Blessed Beneficence
table, 28
ability checks, 27
ammunition, firearm, 72
ammunition, magic, 217
Audible Distance table, planar effect, 69 san?
36 Blessing, 98
group checks, 28 Ammunition of Slaying, ‘Automata, 206 Blessing of Health, 98
in exploration, 34 228 ‘Automatic Rifle, 73, Blessing of Magic
in socal interaction, 33 Amoria, 191 ‘Avalas, 182 Resistance, 98
passive checks, 28, Amulet of Health, 228 ‘Avatar of Death stat Blessing of Protection, 93
roficiency, 27, ‘Amulet of roof against block, 252 Blessing of
absent players, 24 Detection and Location, ‘Avernus, 202 Understanding, 99
‘Abyss, 174, 180 28 avoiding a fight, 48 Blessing of Valhalla, 99
‘Acererak, 354 Amulet of the Planes, 229 ‘Awarding Heroic Blessing of Weapon
‘Acheron, 174, 182 ‘Animated Shield, 228 Inspiration sidebar, 46 Enhancement, 93
‘Acheronian Bloodlust anachronistic thin awarding magic tems, Blessing of Wound 3
planar effect, 69 See character 218 Closure, 39. Cape of the Mountebank,
acknowledge the knowledge, 18 awarding XP, 48 Blood War, 178 242
incredible, 141 ‘Axe of the Dwarvish Lords, Bomb, 72, Cap of
Water Breathing,
acting, 21 21 bond (NPC). See 242
actions in exploration, 34 antisocial behavior, 19 ‘Azzagrat, 180 personality, NPC, 86 Carceri, 174, 187,
vating a magic iter, Apparatus of kvalish, 229 Baalzebul, 203, 800, 355, card accessories, 7
218 Aquallor, 183 Baba Yaga 354 Boo
of Exalted
k Deeds, 237 Carpet of Fling, 242
adamantine, 354 A Question of Enmity Baba Yago's Dancing Book of Vile Darkness, 238
‘Adamantine Armor, 227 Sidebar, 250 Broom 232 Boots ofEvenkind, 239
Carrion Crawler Mucus
poison, 90
‘Adamantine Weapon, 227 Arborea, 174, 183 background, creating ‘Boot of False Tracks, 239 Castle Ravenloft, 355
adding basic facilities, Arcadia, 68, 174, 183 3,55 Boots of Levitation, 239 Cost-Off Armor, 243,
335 Arcadian Vitality planar Bog of Beans, 233 Boots of Speed, 240 Cathrys, 187
‘Advantage, 29 effect, 69 ‘80g of Devouring, 234 Boots of String and Cauldron of Rebirth, 243
adventure, 7 arcana (treasure), 213, ‘Bag of Holding, 234 5) 40 Censer of Contoling ir
‘conflict, 106
‘creating an, 105
326
‘Arcane Study Bastion
Bo of Ticks,
g 234 00 of the Winteands, Elementals, 243
Bahamut, 354 240 central Flanaess, 162
denouement, 120, facility, 336 Baldur's Gate, 355 Borea, 209 ‘Chamada, 197
‘ending, 120) archdevils, 205 Ballsta siege equipment, Border Ethereal, 192 character advancement,
examples, 122 Archive Bastion facility, 96 Boreal Ball adventure, 48
first, 139 338 Baphomet, 182 1B character alignment, 51
hooks, 110 ‘areas of effect, 44 Barovia, 209,355 Bowl of Commanding character arcs, 129,
inhabitants, 109 land mobs, 82 Barrack Bastion facility, Water Elementals, 240 ‘character creation, 137.
keeping moving, 112 ‘Are Magic Items
linkinge 39 Necessary? sidebar,
339
barred doors64 ,
Brac of ers
chery, 240
Bracers of Defense, 241
character knowledge, 18
character objectives, 112
‘maps, 109, 218 basic faites, 35 Brazier of Commanding character sheets, 6
patrons, 110 armaments (treasure), Bastion, 333 Fire Elemental, 241 charges, 220
Bremise, 105 213,328 basic facilites, 335 break episodes, 141 CCharlotan's Die, 243
Progress, Aamor #1, +2, 0F +3, 230 combining, 334 Bright Desert, 147 Charm, 99,
published, 105 ‘Acmor magic tem event, 350 bringing a location
to Charm of Animal
rewards, 120 category, 216 fal
ofla, 382 life, 108 Conjuring, 89
setting, 109 Armor of Gleaming, 230 gaining 333 bringing back the dead, Charm of Darkvision, 99
situations by level, 106 ‘Armor of lnulnerability, irlings, 336 Ci Charm of Feather Falling,
situations tables, 107 230 map, 334 bringing the party 99
social contract of, 18 Armor of Resistance, 231 orders, 336 together, 137, Charm of Heroism, 99
step-by-step, 105 ‘Armor of Vulnerability, 231 special facilities, 335 Brooch of Shielding, 241 Charm of Restoration, 99
stockpile, 129 ‘Armory Bastion facility, tums, 333 ‘Broom of Flying, 241 Charm of the Slayer, 99
‘Adventure Climax table, 339 Bastion Events table, 350 brown mold hazard, 76 Charm of Vitality, 99,
120 ‘Arrow-Catching Shield, Bastion Tracker sheet, Brux, 186 chases, 52
Adventure Connections 21 353 Building a Trap table, 103 Chime of Opening, 244
table, 140, artifacts, 224 Bastion Tracker sidebar, Build Your Own Pantheon Chronias, 201
Adventurers and destroying, 220 352 sidebar, 74 Cinder Wastes, 189
‘Organizations sidebar, art object tables, 215 battle grid, 7,46 ‘Burt Othur Fumes Girele of Eight, 146
“ar ‘Avvandor, 183 Bead of Force, 234 poison, 90,
Girclet of Blasting, 244
Meaty ia?
zathion, 206 ‘sh, Plane of, 207 ‘Bead of Nourishment, 235, Burst Fire property, 72 Citadel of Ten Thousand
‘Ashardalon, 354 Beaof d Refreshment, 235 Buxenus, 183
aids to improvisation, 31 Pearls, 190
‘Asmodeus, 204 Beastlands, 174, 186 buying magic items, 217
lemental Plane of, city, 93
‘Assassin's Blood poison, becoming lost. See Bytopia, 174, 186 Gity of Brass, 188

Sr
‘navigation,
40 Cackle Fever magical
Alchemy Jog, 227, ‘Starting Campaign Bealam,
208 Gity of Doors (Sig), 210

sidebar 122
‘contagion, 61
alien technology, 73, Gity of jewels, 188
behavior, monster calculated DCs, 29,
alignment, 51 Astral
clichés, 117
Color Pools table, Belial, 202 campaign, 127,
character, 51 Cloak of Arachnida, 244
184 Belern, 191 characters, 129 Cloak of Blowing, 244
deities, 74 Astral Plane, 184 Belt ofBwarvenkind, 235 concurrent, 25, ‘loak of Displacement,
NPCs, 86 atmosphere, 13, 26, 119 Bel of Giant Strength, 236 conflicts, 131 244
Outer Planes, 174, 176 attack rolls, 29 Berserke
Ae, 236
r creating a, 127, Cloak of Ebenkind, 244

380 INDEX

T
SN S

look of invisibility, 244 damage, improvising, 30 Dragonlance, 136 ensuring fun forall, 15 eastern, 164
look of Many Foshions, Damage Seventy and Dragon Scale Mail, 254 environmental effects, 68 northern, 166
‘Level table, 31 dragons, chromatic, 143, epic fantasy, 133 western, 170
Cloak of Protection,245 Dancing Sword, 248 Dragon Slayer, 254 episodes, 139 flavors of fantasy, 131
Cloak ofthe Bat, 245 Darkened Depths, 191 draw in the players, 10 Ersatz Eye, 259 flaw (NPC). See
Clock ofthe Manta Roy, Dark Shard Amulet, 248 rad Hm, 254 Eronia, 191 personality, NPC,
245 Dark Sun, 136 Diifiglobe, 254 Escape Factors table, 53 Aying. See travel pace, 38
Clockwork Amulet, 245, Days of the Week table Drizzt Do'Urden, 356 Essence of Ether poison, Folding Boat, 263
Clothesof Mending, 245 (Greyhawk), 146 Drow Poison. See Lolth's 31 food and water, 40
Cocytus, 206 dead gods, 184 ‘Sting poison, 81 Ether Cyclone table, 193 foraging, 40
coins, 213 dead magic zone, 68 dungeon, 65 Ethereal Curtains table, forced march, See
cold, extreme, 68 death, 62 decay, 67 193 extended travel, 38
collapsing roof trap, 100, ‘Death Dells, 182 designing rooms, 66 Ethereal Plane, 192 foreshadowing, 127
color pools, Astral, 184 Decanter of Endless Water, ecology, 103 Euryale, 356 Forgotten Realms, 136
Colothys, 187 249 mapping, 66 events, timed, 142 fortifications, 80,
combat, 42 Deck of lasions, 249 Dungeon Master (OM), 5 Eversmoking Bol, 259, Fortitude, 206
keeping moving, 47 ‘Deck of Many Things, 250 Dungeon Quitks table, 65 every DMs unique, 13 Fouled Stream, The,
narrating,
45 Deep Ethereal, 182 Dust of Disappearance, evil characters, 19.51 adventure, 122
‘combat encounters, 114 deep water, 68 255 example
of play, 10 Fountains of Creation
‘adjusting difficulty, 48 defeated, not dead, 63 Dust of Dress, 255 Bandra, 136 (Plane of Magma), 207
‘command word, 220, fender, 252 Dust of Sneezing and Excelsior, 206, Fragmentation Grenade,
‘Common Map Symbols defenders, prepared, 118, Choking, 255. Executioner’ Ae, 259 3
diagram, 108 degrees offllure, 30 Dwarven Pate, 255 expectations, 15 Free City of Greyhawk,
Companions of the Hall, degrees of success, 30 Dwarven Thrower, 256 Experience Points (XP), 148
355 deity. See gods and other Dynamite Stick, 72 8 and environs, 158
Company ofSeven, 355, powers, 74 Ear Hom of Hearing, 256 taper ies table, 48 ity Watch, 151
Conditions, using and delegation, 13 Earth, Elemental Plane Sook tendon crime, 151
tracking, 43 Delina, 355 of, 188 me gates, 151
confit, adventure, 106 demigods, 74 ‘eastern Flanaess, 164 oe33 jovernment, 151
‘confit, intra‘paty, 17 Demiplane Bastion Eberron, 136 iy cece in 24 iow to use, 150
confit ares, 131 facility, 340 aad locations, 152
conflict with a sentient Demiplanes, 187 Efreet Bole, 256 Sonesta ‘map, 153
item, 227 Demogorgon, 180 Efreeti Chain, 257 essing neighborhoods, 152
‘consequences, 30 Demon Armor, 252 Elder Evils, 356 Bee teligion, 152
‘consumable items, 220 demonic possession, 60 Elemental Chaos, 174 Bploses ube, 73 walls, 151
Contact poison, 90 ‘Demonomicon of lew Elemental Evil, 144, 188, teed va igi water, 68
‘contagions, magical,
61 252 188, 190, Sttome cored Frost Brand, 263
contests. Se calculated Demomweb, 180 Elemental Cem, 257 Frostfll (Pan of ice),
e
OCs, 28 denouement, 120 Elemental Plane of Ait, and af ce, 207
Corellon, 355 Describing Actions table, 188 Furnaces, 189

85 file
Bag 26
cosmology, 173 46 Elemental Plane of Earth, sof 26
chaming gaininga Bastion, 333
cover, 45 designing dungeon 188 Game Expectations
‘rafting magic items, 220 rooms, 66 Elemental Plane of Fire, Eyes of the Eagle, 261 sheet, 14
‘creating a background, 55 diagonal movement, 45 189 Hite Gaming Hall Bastion
‘creating a creature, 56 Diancastra, 356 Elemental Plane of Water, Fal Spe be 335 facility, 340
creating adventures, 105 dice, 6 190 fo tm ee Gaping Maw, 180
‘creatinga magic tem, 58 die rolling, OM, 17 Elemental Planes, 174 cra a8 Garden Bastion facility,
creating a spell, 39 die roling, player, 18 Elsi of Heath, 257 toa 3e 340
creating campaigns, 127, Difficulty Class (Oc), 23 Elminster, 356 falling net trap, 100 Gate Towns of the
‘creating religions, 75 Dimensional Shackles, 54 Elven Chain, 257 ths aten 2 ‘Outlands table, 206
‘reating your own setting, Dis, 202 Elysium, 174, 191 fare se Gauntlets of Ogre Power,
136 Disadvantage, 29 Empyrea, 201 Fae 264
‘creature, creating a, 56 disease. See magical encounter, 9 favors,
81 Gehenna, 69, 174, 197

Eval (coh
Creature Costs by contagions, 61 ‘appealing to players, Gehennan Cruelty planar
Challenge Rating table, Dispater, 202 113 sis
Cha 46 effect, 69
33 divine intervention, 25 combat, 114 pepe Gem of Brightness, 264
Creature Size and Space divine knowledge, 75 during travel, 40 aera Gem of Seeing, 268
table, 44 divine magic, 74 exploration, 114 Tefal
Tre Warp ble, gemstones tables, 214
creature traits, 37 divine rank, 74 ‘objectives, 112 oe Geryon, 203
critical failure, 30 DM-controlled adventurer pace, 118. Fierna, 202 getting players invested,
critical success, 30 ("OM PC’), 23 plan, 112 fighting,21 140
‘rossing the streams, 135 OM die rolling, 17, Fandom, 119 fight
or Right, 48 Ghost Tower of
crypts, 67 DM's Character Tracker ‘social interaction, 114 Figurine of Wondrous Inverness, 164
Crystal Bal, 245 sheet, 130 tension, 118 Power, 261 Giant Fly stat block, 261
Crystal Bal of Mind DMs, multiple, 25, with other creatures, finding players,§ Giant Slayer, 264
Reading, 246 DM's toolbox, $1 x Fire, Elemental Pane aifts, supernatural, 98
Cry
Bal
sta
of Telepathy,
l DM screen, 7 ‘ending a campaign, 142 of, 189 Eiving information to one
246 DM tips, 5 ending a fight, 48 firearms,
72 player, 26
Crystal Boll of Tue Seeing, Dot Need a Settlement ending an adventure, 120 Firearms table, 73, Glamoured Studded
246 Map? sidebar, 93 ‘endinga session, 10 fireball fungus hazard, 76 Leather, 266
Cube of Force, 246 Domains of Delight, 195 Endless Maze, 182 fire-casting statue tr Glasya, 203
Cube of Summoning, 247 Domains of Dread, 208, Enduring Spelloook, 257 101 Gloaming Court, 195
Cubic Gate, 247 Don't Go Overboard Energy Bow, 257 fist adventure, 138 Glorium,
206
cursed items, 20 sidebar, 88 engaging the players (in First World, 198, 356 Gloves of Misile Snaring,
eurses, 60 Doors table, 64 Social interaction), 32 Fizban, 356 265
Curst, 206 Do Players Need to Tack enlarging basic facilities, Flamethrower Coach Gloves of Swimming and
D&O Settings table, 136 Rations? sidebar, 40 335 ‘siege equipment,96 one ans
Daemis Instant Fortes, Dothion, 186 Enspelled Armor, 258 ‘Flame Tongue, 263 00s
of Thievery,

247 Deo You Really Do That? Enspelled Staff, 258 Flanaess, 143 gods, dead, 184
Dagger of Venom, 248 sidebar, 17 Enspelled Weopon, 258 central, 162 ods and other powers,
74

INDEX 381

Gods ofGreyhawk table, high altitude, 69 keeping combat moving, casting spells from, Maure Castle, 164
148 High Tower Inn, 155 7 20 ‘Mechanus, 174, 200
Gogglof
esNight, 265 hirelings, Bastion, 336 keeping the adventure cha 5, 20 Medallion of Thoughts,
Smeets Hit Points moving, 112 crafting, 220 278
Siar tad loss of narrating), 46 Keg Launcher siege ‘creating or modifying medals, 81
Sra Conon tracking, 4 96
equipment, 2,58 Meditation Chamber
tare ot 27 hoards, treasure, 120, Keoghtom’s Ointment, 275, cursed, 20 Bastion faci 342
pester dota Holy Avenger, 269 Keoland, old, 169 fi, 217 memory loss (Feywild),
cat ay isa home plan an Keraptis, 358 ratty, 217 196
Great Mod March, ignment (gods), 74 Khalas, 197 Menagerie Bastion
Se hooks, adventure, 191 Knig of the
ht Watch,
s 146 resilience, 220 facility, 343,
Gren Veel.173 Hopeless, 206 Knowing the Rules sentient, 226 ‘mental stress, 70,
Sremovte Bastin Hom of Biesting, 270 sidebar, 19 special features, 222 Menzoberranzan, 359
paren Horn of Silent Alarm, 270 know your players, 27 values by rarity, 217 Mephistopheles, 204
grove asd 76 Horn of Valhalla, 270, Krangath, 197, Magic item Categories Mercuria, 201
Erase swe 78 Horns of the Beast Krigala, 186 table, 216 Mection, 201
pomie, 3 adventure, 124 Kyuss, 359 Magic Item Crafting Time ‘metagame thinking. See
Engen s,s Horseshoes ofa Zephyr, Laboratory Bastion ‘and Cost table, 221 character knowledge,
lends as 270 facility, 342 Magic Item Power by 1%
conics 8 Horseshoes of Speed, 270 Labyrinth Winds, 188 Rarity table, $8 Midnight Tears poison,
Sap ote woe, 46 hhouse rules, 13 Lad of yPain, 210 Magic Item Rarities and a
honed Howler's Crag, 206 aera Silverhand, 359 Values table, 217 milestones, 49
‘organs, hhow to run a session, 9 Lamordia 209,
, Magic Item Rarities table, Minauros, 202
rnetig
ct es HuntingRife, 73, land, parcels of, 81 28 Miner Difficulties
basen et Ice, Plane of, 207 Land ofBlack Ice, 147 Magic Item Rules sidebar, adventure, 123,
id ice, 69 Lantern of Revealing, 275 217 Minethys, 187,
Icewind Dale, 388 large groups, 23 (Magic ems Awarded by ‘miniatures, 7,44
mat a eis ideal (NPC). See Laser Pistol, 73 Level table, 278 Minor Beneficial
wae personality, NPC, 86 Laser Rifle, 73 Magic Item's Creator or Properties table, 224
mysteries of, 147 legit, 358 Leag of Malevue
olence, Intended User table,
Minor Detrimental
reporting 1) immovable Rod, 270 359 22
sie
Properties table, 225
implements (weasure), learning by observing13, , Mage tems fr Starting
aroun Minse, 359
ct 28 213,329 lesser deities, 74 Characters sidebar, 220
yup area ‘Mirtorof life Trapping,
improvising, ads to, 31
Erasrah,
lethality, scaling, 62
357 improvising answers, 31 letterof
s
Magic Item's History
table, 222
278
Mistral Reach, 188
poncpons ©) improvising Damage recommendation, 80
table 300
Magic Item's Minor
Mithardi, 183
Eide and Ried level advancement Property table, 223,
ee mithral, 359
incarprating new without
XP, 49 ‘Magic Item's Quirk table,
cada Beton acy, Mithral Armor, 279
ayers, 24 Level-Based Renown
individual treasure, 120
23
‘mixing potions, 216
e table, 92, Magic item Tools table, ‘Mob Results table, 83,
Garponde 73 infernal hierarchy, 208 leveling up, 48 2 ‘mobs, 82
fade 39 inferno hazard, 76 Levistus, 203 Magic item Tracker sheet, Moloch, 203
Fades 1417 Infinite Staircase, 177 Library Bastion facility, 219
Hage 28 monster alignment, 51
ingested poor9
,0 342 Magma, Plane of, 207 monster behavior, 116
Pabitof Thun, inhaled poison, 90 Lightning Cannon siege Major Beneficial
Monster Personality
"8 Initial afttude table, 116 equipment, 96 Properties table, 224 table, 117,
Happensance Hoks Initiative, 42 Limbo, 174, 198 Major Detrimental
Monster Relationships
ett injury poison, 90 limits, hard and sof, 15 Properties table, 225,
table, 117 ‘
7 tne Planes, 174 line of sight, 45, Maladomini, 203, monsters casting spells,
raf pe, instigating, 21 linking adventures, 139 Malagard, 203
Pat fay Ste 266 46
Instrument of Mion, Living History sidebar, Malbolge, 203 ‘months (Greyhawk), 146
Hato a 2 160 Malice poison, 91 ‘Moonblade, 279
Pat dy, 7 Insieument of Sribing, living quarters, 67 Malsheem, 204 Moon-Touched Sword, 280
haste an Lock Complesity table, 64 ‘Mammon, 202
Ph Moradin, 359
of les, 28 Irsseument of the Bards, locked doors, 64 Mangonel siege
hence ‘morale. See fight or fight,
27 Lock of Tckery, 275 equipment, 97,
48
hea pepo 68 intra:pary confit, 17 Lock Quality table, 64 Mantle of Spell Resistance, Mordenkainen, 146, 359
Helm of Brilliance, 268 intrigue, 134 Lolth, 180 276 Mordent, 209
Fan omgrendg Investigation ski, 35 Lolth’s Sting poison, 91 Ma of Bodi
n ly Heal
u th, Mount Celestia, 69, 174,
Languages,
268 Invoked Devastation, 147, long range, tracking 2 cans
iin ep 2 200
160,170 Position at, 45 Manual
of Gain
Pn porn Mud Hills, 189,
oun Stone, 273 Lord Soth, 359 Exercise, 277
Fp ten Grae multiple DMs, 25
Iron Bands flor, 274 lore glossary, 354 Manual of Golems, 277 ‘multiverse, 180,
Iron Flask, 274 Lost Caverns of Man of Quickness
ual of Mungoth, 197
seponaand. 7 Isle of read, 191 Teojcanth, 164 ‘Action, 278 Muspelheim, 210
Pete ote ane, 357 tz, 145, 148, 358 loyalty, 89, ‘maps, 365,
Foe of he ele, 329 ‘mutual respect, 15
JallariSallavaian, 146, Luck Blade, 275 adventure, 109 mystery, 134
here ray. 388 Lunia, 207, chases, $3, Mystery Key, 280,
Mero apo,
4 _Joveln of Lightning, 275 Lute of Thunderous dungeon, 33, 66
Hee
mythic fantasy, 134
ce 8 journal, campaign, 7,127 ‘humping, 275 principles66
,
Herd ony myths, 75,
Journey stages, 56 Mace of Disruption, 276 settlement
33, 93
, name tables, 85,
Tanah 9 challenges, 33 Mace of Smiting, 276 symbols, 109 narration, 26
evade Hy Sc Journeys without Mace of Teror, 276
tach 3 Destinations sidebar, madness, See mental
tactical,
using, 33,
44 during travel, 39,
in combat, 46
ecaving se Fr stress, 70, wilderness, 33,
ioumor et natural subterranean
Jovar, 201 ‘magical contagions, 61 marching order, 11 ‘areas, 67
Sextet 38 Juibles, 181 ‘magic item(s), 216 Mariner's Armor, 278 Nature's Mante, 280
bien pap 31 Kalakeri, 209, A227 marks ofprestige, 80 navigation, 40
Piden ngs Karasuthra, 186 activating a, 218, Material Plane, 188 Necklace of Adoptation,
event 35 Kas the Betrayer, 358 awarding, 218 ‘material realms, 173 280

Necklace of Fireballs, 280 Passive Perception, 35, Potion Mi lity table, Random Treasure Hoard Rod of Lordly Might, 300
Necklace of Prayer Beads, Patron Hooks table, 111 216 table, 121 Rod of Resurrection, 301
281 patrons, adventure, 110 Potion of Animal Ravenloft, 136 Rod of Rulership, 301
‘Negative Plane, 201 Pearl of Power, 284 Friendship, 287 Raven Queen, 367 Rod of Security, 301
Nessus, 204 Perception, 35 Potion of Clairvoyance, Ravnica, 136 Rod of the Pact Keeper,
Neverwinter, 360 ‘and encounters, 36 287 razorvine hazard, 78 301
next dawn, 220 Perfume of Bewitching, ation of Climbing, 287 reactive tactics, 117 Rods magic item
Nidavelir, 210 284 Potion of Comprehension, read-aloud text, 9 category, 216
Niffheien, 197 Periapt of Health, 284 287 recap, 9 roleplaying, 32
Nine Hells, 174, 207 Periapt of Proof against Potion of Diminution, 287 recording rules rolling Initiative, 42
Nine Lives Stealer, 281 Poison, 284 Potion of Fire Breath, 287 interpretations, 13 rolling stone trap, 102
“no, but" 31 Periapt of Wound Closure, Potion of Flying, 287 recurring elements, 140 rooms, designing
Nolzur's Marvelous 284 Potion of Gaseous Form, recurring NPCs, 88 dungeon, 66
Pigments, 281 personality, 51, 86, 116 287 relationships, monster, Rope of Climbing, 301
noncombat challenges, Phandalin, 360 Potion of Giant Strength, 17 Rope of Entanglement,
XP for, 49 Philter
of Love, 285 288 relics (treasure), 213, 330 301
nonplayer characters Phlegethon, 206 Potion of Greater religions, creating, 75, Rope of Mending, 302
(NPCs), 84 Phiegethos, 202 Invisibility, 288 religious practice, 75 Ruby of the War Mage,
as party members, Pipe of Smoke Monsters, Potion of Growth, 288 Reliquary Bastion facility, 302
23, 88 235 Potion of Healing, 288 344 Rudolph van Richten, 361
portrayals of, 32 Pipes of Haunting, 285 Potion of Heroism, 288 Reload property, 72 rulebooks, 6
recurring, 88 Pipes of the Sewers, 285 Potion of Invisibility, 288 renown, 92 rule of fun, 12
northern Flanaess, 166 place to play, 6 Potion of Invulnerabilty, resolving outcomes, 27 rules discussions, 18
note-taking materials, 6 Plague-Mort, 206 288 respect, mutual, 15 rules interpretations,
NPC Appearance table, Plain of Infinite Portals, Potion of Longevity, 288 respect for the DM, 18 recording, 13,
86 180 Potion of Mind Reading, respect for the players, 17 running combat, 42
NPC Secrets table, 88 plan adventures, 139 288 rests, 118 running exploration, 33,
NPC Tracker sheet, 87 Planar Adventure Potion of Poison, 288 Revolver, 73 running social
Oathbow, 282 Situations table, 179 Potion of Pugilism, 289 rewards, adventure, 120 interaction, 32
objectives, encounter, 112 planar adventuring, 178 Potion of Resistance, 289 rewards, milestone, 49 running the game, 21
‘Observatory Bastion planar dissonance, 176 Potion of Speed, 289 rewards, quest, 121 Sacristy Bastion facility,
facility, 343 planar effects, 69 Potion of Vitality, 289, Ribcage, 206 344
obstacles (in travel), 40 planar portals, 176 Potion of Water Breathing, Riftcanyon, 147 Saddle of the Cavalier, 302
Ocanthus, 182 planar travel, 176 289 rights, special, 81 ‘Sample Fear DCs table,
‘Oceanus, River, 177 plan encounters, 112 Potions magic item Rigus, 206 70
erik, 143 Plane of Ash, 207 category, 216 Ring of Animal Influence, ‘Sample Guilds table, 347
Ocrth, 143 Plane of Ice, 207 Pot of Awakening, 289 292 Sample Mental Stress
Oil of Etherealness, 282 Plane of Magma, 207 precipitation, 38, 69 Ring of Djinn Effects table, 70
Oil of Sharpness, 282 Plane of Ooze, 207 premise, adventure, 105 ‘Summoning, 292 Sanctuary Bastion facility,
Oil of Slipperiness, 283 Plane of Shadow. See premise, campaign, 129 Ring of Elemental 345
Oil of Taggit poison, 91 ‘Shadowfell, 208 prepared defenders, 118 Command, 292 Sanctum Bastion facility,
Oinos, 197, planes and alignment, 51, preparing a session, 8 Ring ofEvasion, 293 346
old Keoland, 169 174, 176 prestige, marks of, 80 Ring of Feather Falling, saving throws, 29
one-hour guideline, 8 Planescape, 136 us, 198, 200 293 scaling lethality, 62
Ooze, Plane of, 207 planes of existence, 173 rince of Frost, 360 Ring of Free Action, 293 Scarab of Protection, 302
optimizing, 21 Plate Armor of Prismeer, 195 Ring of invisibility, 293 Scarlet Order, 146
‘Orb of Direction, 283 Etherealness, 286 problem-solving, 22 Ring of jumping, 293 Scheduling Games
proficiency, 27 Ring of Mind Shielding,
(Orb of Dragonkind, 283, player(s), 6 sidebar, 6
Orb of Time, 284 absent, 24 properties, firearms, 72 293 science fantasy, 135
Orcus, 181 die rolling, 18 Prosthetic Limb, 290 Ring of Protection, 294 ‘Scimitar of Speed, 302
‘Order of the Hart, 146 drawing attention, 26 psychic dissonance. See Ring of Regeneration, 294 ‘Scriptorium Bastion
orders (Bastion), 336 drawing in (to an planar dissonance, 176 Ring of Resistance, 294 facility, 346
organization ethos, 51 adventure), 110 psychic wind, 185, Ring of Shooting Stars, ‘Scroll of Protection, 302
organizations engaging (in social Psychic Wind Location 294 Scroll of Titan
(Greyhawk), 146 interaction), 32 Effects table, 185 Ring of Spell Storing, 295 ‘Summoning, 303
Orthrys, 187 exploiting the rules, 19 Psychic Wind Psychic Ring of Spell Turning, 295 Scrolls magic item
Otiluke, 146, 360 favorites, 140 Effects table, 185 Ring of Swimming, 295 category, 216
Otto, 146, 360 finding, 6 Pub Bastion facility, 344 Ring ofTelekinesis, 295 Sea of Fire, 189
outcomes, resolving, 27 getting invested, 140 Purple Worm Poison, 91 Ring of the Ram, 296 Sea of Ice, 191
Outer Planes, 174 incorporating new, 24 Quaal's Feather Token, Ring of Three Wishes, 296 Sea of Light, 191
alignment and the, 51, input (to a campaign), 290 Ring of Warmth, 296 searches (in travel), 41
174,176 129 of the
Quarterstaff Ring of Water Walking, 296 Secret Doors table, 64
layers of the, 176 know your, 21 ‘Acrobat, 291 Ring of X-ray Vision, 296 secrets and discovery, 26
traveling the, 177 overly cautious, 18 quasi-deities, 74 Rings magic item seelie fey. See Summer
Outer Planes table, 174 with multiple Queen ofAir and category, 216 Court, 195
Outlands, 174, 205 characters, 23 Darkness, 195, 360 Rival Coin, 296 selling magic items, 217
pace, encounter, 118 play style, 13 quest rewards, 121 River Oceanus, 177 Semiautomatic Pistol, 73
Paladine. See Bahamut, Pluton, 197 quicksand pit hazard, 77 River Styx, 178 Sending Stones, 303
354. poison, 90, Quiver of Ehlonna, 291 River Styx hazard, 78 sentient magic items, 226
Pale Tincture poison, 97 poisoned darts trap, 101 Radiant Citadel, 193 roads, 38 Sentinel Shield, 303,
Pandemonium, 69, 174, poisoned needle trap, 102 Rain of Colorless Fire, Robe of Eyes, 297 serials, 139
206 poisonous gas hazard, 77 147 Robe of Scintillating Serpent Venom poison,
Pandesmos, 206 Pole of Angling, 286 Ram siege equipment, 97 Colors, 297 a
pantheon, creating a, 74 Pole of Collapsing, 286 random encounters, 119 Robe of Stars, 297 session, game, 9
Para-elemental Planes, Porphatys, 187 Random Individual Robe of the Archmagi, 298 ending a, 10,
207 Portable Hole, 286 Treasure table, 120 Robe of Useful Items, 298 preparing a, 8
parcels of land, 81 Portcullises table, 64 random magic item rarity, Rock of Bral, 361 session-based
party leader, 23, Positive Plane, 208, 218 rockslide hazard, 78 advancement, 49
passing time, 10 possession, demonic, 60 random magic items Rod of Absorption, 299 session zero, 137
passive checks, 28 Poster Map sidebar, 143 tables, 326 Rod of Alertness, 299 setting, adventure, 109

INDEX 383

setting, campaign, 136 Stable Bastion facility, taking turns, 23, 34 Training to Gain Levels Wand of Magic Detection,
settlements, 93 Ea Talisman of Pure Good, be, 49 320
settlement tables, 93 Staff of Adermment, 306 314 tras, creature, $7 Waofnd Magic Missiles,
Settlement Tracker sheet, Sta of Birdos
ff 307 Talisman ofthe Sphere, traps, 100 320
95 Stafof Charming, 307 315 building your own, 103 Waofnd Orcus, 320
Seven Heavens. See Staff Fire, 307 Talisman of Ukimate Evil, travel, 36 Wand of Paralysis, 321
Mount Celestia, 200, ‘Staff
of Flowers, 308 315 between worlds, 199 Wand of Polymorph, 321
‘Sewer Plague magical Sta of Fost, 308 Talking Doll, 315 in the Outer Planes, Wand of Pyrotechnics, 321
contagion, 61 Sto of Healing, 308 Tank of ard
Sobriety, 315 7 Wand of Secrets, 322
shadow crossings, 208 Sta of Power, 308 ‘Targets in Area of Effect pace, 38 Wand of the War Mage,
Shadowell, 208 Sto of Striking, 309 table,
83 Travel Planner sheet, 37 +1, #2, or +3, 322
Shadowfell Despair table, Staff of Swarming Insects, Tasha. See lggwil, 358 Travel Terrain table, 38 Wand
of Web, 322
210 508 Teleportation Circle treasure, 213 Wan of Wonder, 322
Shar, 164
Shedakiah (the Slime
Pits), 181
Sette Me i, 310
‘Staff of the Adder, 309 Bastion facility, 347
Temple of Elemental Evil,
hoards, 120,
individual, 120
‘Wands magic item
‘category, 217
Staff ofthe Python, 311 144, 164 ‘monster preferences, war, 135
Shel 2,073,303 Staff the Woodlands, Temple of the Far 121 War Room Bastion
Shield
Sha
of Exresion, 30 mM Horizon, 156 themes, 12, 213, facility, 349
Sto of Thundond er ‘Temple of the Radiant Trebuchet siege water, 68
‘Attraction, 308 tiphing 311 ‘Sun, 156 equipment, 97
‘Shield ofthe Cavalier, 304 Saf of itherng, 12 Tentacle Rod, 316 Tident of Fish Command,
Water, Elemental Plane
of, 190
Shotgun, 73 Staffs magie tern Thalasia, 191, 77 Waterdeep, 363
shrines, 67 eatery, 217 Thanatos, 181 Tell Fens, 166
Shurrock, 186 stating level, 137,220 Tharizdun, 148, 362 “Trophy Room Bastion
Wave, 323
Weapon, +1, +2,0r+3,
siege equipment, 96 Starting locaton, 138, Theater Bastion facility, facility, 343 324
Siege Tower siege 148 348 Truth Serum poison, 91 Weapon of Waming, 324
‘equipment, 97 States of Ruin table, 67 Theros, 136 trying again, 28 ‘Weapons magic item
Sight Rot magical ‘step-by-step adventures, ‘The Rule ofFun sidebar, Twin Par category, 217
Contagion, 61 ios 2 Bytop Weather table, 38
$9 Cly of Doors, 210 step-by-step campaigns, things you need, 6 Typical DCs table, 29 webs hazard, 79,
Silt Flats, 191 127 thin ice, 69 Underdark, 362 Well of Many Worlds, 324
Silver Dragon Inn, 155 Stone of Controlling Earth Three Glooms. See Undermountain, 362 western Flanaess, 170
Sivered Weapon, 304 Elemental 312 Hades, 197 Underwater Encounter What's New in the 2024
Sirocco Straits, 188 Stoneof Good Luck Thuldanin, 182 Distance table, 36 Version? sidebar,
size and space, creature, (Luckstone), 312 Thurderous Greatelub, Unearthed Arcana, 157 Whelm, 324
44 Storehouse Bastion 316 Universl Solvent, 318, White Plume Mountain,
skills. ee proficiency, 27, facility, 347 Tiarnat, 362 nsec ey. See 147
Slime Pits (Shedaklah), stony-based tiers of play, 106, 131 Gloaming Cour, 195 wilderness. See travel, 36;
181 advancement, 49 timed events, 142 Urban Chase adventure setting, 109
Slippers of Spider stonteling, 22 time in the campaign, Complications table, Wilderness Chase
limbing, 304 Strahd von Zarovieh, 361 a2 sé ‘Complications table,
slippery ice, 69 Stinhaven, 136 time warp (Feywild), 196 urgency and rests,
18
Using Pblished
54
slower travelers, 38 Strong wind, 69 Tintibulus, 182 wilderness maps, 33,
small groups, 23 structured tens, 23 tips, DM,5 ‘Adventures sidebar, wild magic zone, 69
Smithy Bastion facility, Sta, 203 Titania. See Summer 10s Wildspace, 184
347 Sty River, 78,178 Queen, 195 Using the Game wind, strong, 69
smoke Grenade, 73 Subvert Clichés sidebar, titans, 74 Expectations Sheet Wind Fon, 325,
‘Smoldering Armor, 305 mM titles,81 sidebar 15 Winds of Pandemonium
Social contract of success at a cost, 30 Tomb of Horrors, 166 Vojra Safa, 362
planar effect, 69
adventures, 18 Summer Court, 195, Tome of Clear Thought, Valachan, 209
Minged Coe Te,
Winged Boers, 525
social interaction, 32 Summer Queen, 195, 362 37 Valor's Call, 363
| encounters, 114 ‘Sun Blade, 312 Tome of Leadership and vaults, 67 enture, 123
socializing, 22, supernatural gis, 98 Influence, 317 Vecna, 148, 363 Wings of Fling, 325
Solania, 201 Supernatural Hooks Tome ofthe Stiled Tongue, vehicles, 39 Wondrous Items magic
sourcebooks, 7 table, 11 317 Venger, 363
item category, 217
Sovereign Glue, 305 supernatural horeor, 134 Tome of Understanding, Venya, 201 work areas, 67
Spawning sone, 198 Suspended Cauldron 317 vestiges, 74 Workshop Bastion facility,
special facilities, 335 siege equipment, 97 tools. See proficiency, 27 Veteran’ Cone, 318 349
Special Facilities table, ‘swamp of Oblivion Torch, 206 vi, 363,
Wraps of Unarmed Power,
| 337 (Plane of Ooze), 207 Torchy’s, 189, Vicious vine hazard, 78 325
Special Facility swashbuckling, 135 ‘Torpor poison, 91 Vetus Weapon, 318 Writing for Yourself
‘Acquistion table, 335 sword and sorcery, 133 total party kil ("TPK”), vilage, 3,
special facility Sword Coast, 362 ‘See what if everyone ila, 88, 106, 40 sidebar, 106
‘Wyvern Poison, 91
descriptions, 336 Sword of Answering, 313, dies? 63 le, 13 Xanathar, 363
special favors, 81 ‘Sword of Kas, 313, Tower Arcane, 197 visibility, 36 Xa0s, 206
special movement, 39 Sword of Life Stealing, 314 town, 93, Vieakth, 363, XP Budget per Character
special rights, 81 ‘Sword of Sharpness, 314 tracking information Vorpal Sword, 318 table, 15
speeding combat, 23 ‘Sword of Vengeance, 314 Walloping Ammurition, Yawning Portal, 364 |
spel. creating 2, $3 ‘Sword of Wounding, 314 318 Yeenoghu, 182
Spell Damage table, $9 Syvania, 206 ‘monster Hit Points, 42 wandering monsters. See
‘Spelguord Shield, 305
yellow mold hazard, 79
Sylvan Ton, 314 position at long range, random encounters,
Spellarmmer, 138
“yes, and,” 31
Szass Tam, 362 45 ng Yagdeasi the Word Te,
spells (cast from magic table rules! See ensuring time, 34 Wond of Binding, 318. 78
items), 220 fun for all 18 tracking (in avel) 41 Wo of Conducting
nd , 319 Yolande, 364
Spell Scroll, 305, table talk. See Do You ‘Trade Bars table, 213 Wand of Enemy Detection, Your World's Calendar
‘Sphere of Annihilation, Really Do That? 17 Tradegate, 206 319
306 tactieal maps, 44 Trade Goods table, 213 Wand ofFeor, 319
spiked pit trap, 103 tactics, reactive, 17 tragic limits, 17 Wand of Fireballs, 319 Zagyg, 364
Spirit Board, 306 Takhisis. See Tiamat, 362 training, 81 Wond of Ughinig Bol, Zargon, 364
spotight, sharing, 17 Taking Breaks sidebar, 10 Training Area Bastion
Zariel, 202
facility, 348 Zuggtmoy, 181

384 INDEX
a ——